Introduction
Fianna Fáil is committed to a stronger, simpler and more democratic European Union. We believe that the EU must pursue policies which promote growth, jobs, equality and fairness for all citizens.

Since Ireland applied for membership under former Taoiseach Seán Lemass, Fianna Fáil has been a pro-European party. As a member party of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE), Fianna Fáil will continue to be a strong voice for Irish citizens in the European Parliament.

We have a very strong team of candidates that are committed, experienced and constructive. Our candidates will give Irish citizens strong representation in the European Parliament, tackling the issues that affect them and shaping European legislation that reflects the concerns of our communities.

As the European Parliament is the only directly elected European body of the European Union, the policies it produces must deliver for every Irish citizen.

We are five years into the biggest crisis since the Union was founded. A financial crisis became an economic one which has hit many millions of citizens throughout the EU. Fianna Fáil wants the world to have confidence in the Eurozone Financial System and we want our single currency to have a genuine banking union.

The European Union must focus more on creating jobs and growing the economy. We believe that Quantitative Easing (QE) is the correct response to low growth and threatened inflation.

Europe needs to start offering workable solutions to the challenges we face instead of compounding them.

Fianna Fáil in the European Parliament will continue to fight for a better EU which serves its citizens. We will be a constructive voice for the Irish people on the issues which matter to them.

Ending the Eurozone Crisis
Separate Sovereign and Banking Debt

Fianna Fáil believes that the EU must fulfil its commitment to separate sovereign debt and banking debt within the Union. European leaders agreed in June 2012 to break the vicious circle between banks and sovereign debt.

This is the most crucial issue for the Irish people and its economy. Ireland and Europe’s recovery will be much, much slower if this is not done. Unemployment will remain high and consumer confidence across the EU will remain too low.

The Irish people need to know that the 2012 agreement stands and will be acted upon in good faith and in solidarity.

There needs to be action on retroactively recapitalising Irish banks and recognising the unfair burden Ireland took at the beginning of the financial crisis.

Everyone now acknowledges that the structure of the Eurozone as a currency union was flawed and impeded countries who tried to combat the Eurozone crisis at the beginning. There was no European Stability Mechanism (ESM) in place until July 2013.

Create a Fiscal and Transfer Union

The EU needs to recognise the mistakes of the past and the errors that were made. Fianna Fáil believes there should be a more ambitious fiscal union within the EU. In particular, one which involves transfers between states and allows the Union some modest revenue rising capacity in order to balance the economic equilibrium of the EU.

Banking Union
Fianna Fáil believes that a fully functioning banking union must include common regulation, common deposit insurance and a common resolution mechanism. Without these elements, a fully functioning banking union will not be achieved. The EU operates in a single market for goods and services. It makes sense for a full banking union with a strong regulatory system to operate within that market.

Therefore we welcome the establishment of the single supervisory mechanism by November 2014 and the agreement on the single resolution mechanism, which will become operational in January 2015.

Banking Regulations
In order to achieve financial stability within the EU it is necessary to have soundly regulated and safe financial institutions. Fianna Fáil believes now is the time to establish a common framework ensuring prudential oversight and consumer protection all over the European internal market. The new EU regulator must be well resourced, have strong dissuasive sanctions and clear enforcement mechanisms in order to ensure that the banking crisis which we are only now recovering from, never happens again.

European Banking Salary Caps
Fianna Fáil is in favour of a pay structure at a European level for senior bank staff that discourages reckless and speculative ventures. Bonuses to senior executives should be structured such that they can be rescinded if a financial institution incurs significant losses in subsequent years as a result of actions which initially led to short term profits.

EU Focus on Jobs
Deepening the EU Single Market

Fianna Fáil believes in the power and success of the European single market, which has laid the foundation for thousands of new jobs in Ireland.

We will prioritise the completion and expansion of the single market. Europe must complete the market in services, and must identify and create new opportunities for economic growth and greater innovation. These measures will boost Ireland’s competitiveness.

Defending our Corporation Tax
Fianna Fáil will continue the fight to maintain Ireland’s control over our Corporation Tax rate. National taxation rates are a national competency in the EU. We will fight to ensure that this remains the case. We are committed to the principle of tax competition. We are convinced that we need to do more to fight tax avoidance and evasion.

We welcome any progress made on international tax agreements and believe that the Irish government should cooperate fully with these talks.

The establishment of a favourable financial framework to encourage the setting up of new businesses in Ireland and Europe is a key priority and one which is central to boosting investment in Ireland and Europe.

Youth Guarantee
Fianna Fáil believes that our young people have been affected disproportionately in the current economic crisis. We support the swift and effective implementation of the Youth Guarantee scheme in Ireland. The Youth Guarantee scheme must offer high quality, properly structured work experience for young unemployed people. This Scheme must develop the skills and talents of our young population and enable them to gain long term full time employment on completion.

The EU must assist governments more to ensure that all young people under 25 whether registered with employment services or not – get a good-quality, concrete offer within 4 months of their leaving formal education or becoming unemployed. We believe the Finnish model is the correct model to follow in this regard which links the education, skills and interests of the young person to a well-structured, high quality internship.

Europe and European leaders need to do more to address the employment problems facing our young people. The Youth Guarantee Scheme and internship programmes can only be effective if they are balanced with the creation of sustainable employment opportunities and targeted job creation programmes under the European Social Fund.

Infrastructure Investment
Further investment at an EU level is needed to fully integrate all regions of Europe in order to ensure all citizens benefit from the single market. Fianna Fáil fully supports European Investment Bank lending for Irish infrastructure projects and believe more funding should be sought for strategic national infrastructure projects such as the DART Underground Project and the Western Arc Project.

Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership

Fianna Fáil fully supports the successful conclusion of the EU-US free trade agreement. This agreement could boost the European economy by over €100 billion annually.

However, we will ensure that Ireland’s interests in agriculture and the agri-food sector are defended in the negotiations of this deal.

Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs)

Fianna Fáil understands that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) drive prosperity in Ireland and in Europe. Our MEPs will work to facilitate the creation of more jobs through easier access to finance, simpler rules for investment funds and increased market access to support new, innovative businesses across Ireland and Europe, and opportunities for young entrepreneurs.

We will prioritise cutting red tape for SMEs, simplifying access to EU funds for SMEs and ensuring that Irish SMEs benefit more from EU structural funds.

An EU of Innovation

Promoting the Digital Economy
Fianna Fáil will work to create a modern economy that simplifies life through more e-services, and stimulates e-commerce by improving faster internet access, expanding broadband access in rural areas and creating a genuine single market in telecommunications.

Given that all roaming costs are to be abolished in the European Union by December 2015, Fianna Fáil will work to ensure that customers will not be unfairly penalised for domestic calls by providers seeking to recoup costs.

A Single European Sky
Fianna Fáil supports the plan to create a Single European Sky which will see the design, management and regulation of airspace in Europe coordinated throughout the European Union. The Single European Sky will reduce costs to air passengers, reduce journey times within the EU and reduce the environmental impact that air travel has on our environment.

Horizon 2020
Fianna Fáil believes that the Government needs to ensure that Ireland benefits fully from the Horizon 2020 programme. This is the biggest EU Research and Innovation programme ever with nearly €80 billion of funding available over 7 years (2014 to 2020). The public and private sector must work together in order to seek Horizon 2020 funding and guarantee smart, sustainable and inclusive growth and jobs for Ireland in the future.

Agriculture: Sustaining the Family Farm

Preserving CAP
Fianna Fáil will continue to fight for European farming policies which will deliver a fair return for fair work to all farmers and ensure sustainable, vibrant and viable rural communities.

The Common Agricultural Policy has played a vital role in keeping the agricultural heartbeat of rural Ireland beating, preserving the countryside across the continent, and providing high quality, low cost produce to the European consumer.

The new CAP deal, due to come in place in 2015 marks the first budget reduction for the policy in its history. With a smaller budget we must ensure that programmes are targeted at the farmers who deliver high quality produce and public goods to the highest environmental, health and safety standards.

Empowering all Farmers
Fine Gael’s preoccupation during the CAP negotiations appears to have been focussed on preserving the interests of a small number of farmers in receipt of large grants based on historical circumstances. Fianna Fáil believes in a CAP package that would sustain as many family farms as is practicable and empower all farmers with the opportunity to improve their holdings. Separately, we have published detailed proposals on implementing the CAP package.

Future of Irish Agriculture
Currently, exports for the Irish agri-food sector are worth close to €10 billion and there is significant scope for growth here as new and emerging markets are targeted.

Fianna Fáil MEPs will ensure that the interests of this sector are promoted and protected in all EU trade negotiations and deals.

The future of Irish agriculture and the agri-food sector needs Europe to take a serious approach to ensure a fair price for farmers from both multiples and processors.

If we want to sustain farming into the future and meet the targets of Harvest 2020, farmers must be able to receive a fair price for their produce.

Fianna Fáil is also calling for EU legislation to ensure small food producers are paid within 30 days of the sale of goods in order to ensure the sustainability of the small scale food production industry.

Implementation and future reviews of the CAP agreement should have considerable social and economic implications meaning the purpose of farming is to maintain the family farm at the heart of European agriculture and to ensure that all farmers, no matter where they are from and irrespective of the size and type of land, will receive a fair return from agriculture.

Fisheries
Fianna Fáil has welcomed the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund agreement which contains a new scheme for young fishermen under the age of 40. This scheme offers new funding for small ports affected by a decline in fish landings to allow for diversification and funding for quality and safety initiatives. The provision of seed capital in this fund is clearly required to allow smaller ports to diversify into new economic activities.

This fund will help build on the implementation of the Common Fisheries Policy within the EU. Fianna Fáil will continue to seek fisheries policy at an EU level which focuses on maintaining employment in the fisheries sector and in peripheral coastal communities dependent on fisheries.

An Equal Europe

Sharing our Health Services
The European Union is a world leader in health service provision. Fianna Fáil believes that there is huge potential in the sharing of expertise and research in the health care sector on a European level. We also believe that services provided by Member States should, in principle, be accessible to all citizens of the European Union. Shared health services across the borders of Europe would reduce inefficiencies and provide a better coverage of services for all our citizens.

Three and a half million Europeans will die from smoking related diseases during the term of the next parliament and more than €100 billion will be spent treating the effects. These are horrifying facts and we must face up to them. Fianna Fáil welcomes the passing of the new directive earlier this year but more needs to be done. Ireland needs to be at the forefront of that and be a strong anti-tobacco voice in Europe.

Building on the new EU Youth, Education and Sport Programme - Erasmus+

The new Erasmus+ programme aims to boost skills and employability, as well as modernising Education, Training, and Youth work. The new programme has a budget of €14.7 billion; a 40% increase compared to previous budgets.

Fianna Fáil will work to ensure that the benefits of this new programme will be realised by Irish students, youth organisations and those involved in lifelong learning.

Sport
Under the Erasmus+ Programme sport benefit from programmes to develop transfer, and implement innovative ideas and practices at European, national, regional, and local level with cross border cooperation.

We will ensure that the opportunity is taken to utilise this new programme and budget to support grassroots projects and address cross-border challenges such as combating match-fixing, doping, violence and racism.

Promoting Equality

Fianna Fáil believes that the best way of promoting equality in the EU is by guaranteeing the right to education for all. The EU should also seek to secure, in particular, the rights of women to be treated equally across the world. The EU should ratify the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.

European Social Fund - Building Stronger Communities
The European Social Fund is Europe’s main instrument for employment promotion and supporting the most vulnerable in our society. With an overall budget of €80 billion this Fund will play a crucial role in the 2014 - 2020 programming period in terms of ensuring quality jobs for Irish citizens, supporting solutions to address social, employment and educational needs.

Fianna Fáil’s aim is to ensure that the actions of this Fund are supported by and accessible to local authorities, social partners and NGOs in order to bring the benefits of this Programme to the widest number of Irish citizens.

The allocation of at least 20% of the Fund to social inclusion will mean that people in difficulties and those from disadvantaged groups will get more support to have the same opportunities as others to integrate into society. With an estimated 5,000 people homeless in Ireland at any one time, the gaps in society must be closed with target measures in Ireland on poverty and social exclusion.

Ireland also has access to additional funding under the Youth Employment Initiative. The priority for Fianna Fáil MEPs is to ensure that Ireland effectively and efficiently utilises this Fund to assist young people to enter the labour market with meaningful and sustainable employment opportunities.

Reforming the EU
Restore the fairness and equality of the Community Method of Decision Making

Fianna Fáil believes the EU must rebalance the institutional powers of the EU back in favour of the European Commission and Parliament and away from the intergovernmental approach which has become increasingly prominent in recent years.

The European Commission as the guardian of the EU Treaties and the common European interest, including protection of the interests of smaller EU Member States, must be restored as the guiding force in European affairs. The influence of Germany and France throughout the EU must be balanced by a strong European Commission which represents all interests of the Union.

Fianna Fáil will continue to fight to retain Ireland’s seat at the Commission table. In order to hold an EU wide view in decision making, it is important that every Member State has equal representation at the European Commission table.

Rebuilding the EMU

Fianna Fáil also calls for a re-examination of the structures of the Economic and Monetary Union as well as the mandate of the European Central Bank. The architecture to ensure the long term sustainability of the Eurozone is still absent.

This must be corrected and provide a basis for the future prosperity of the Union. The ECB’s mandate must require policies for targeted growth as well as targeting inflation.

A Single Location for the European Parliament
Fianna Fáil is committed to making better use of your money by continuing to cut administrative budgets and lead the fight for a single location for the European Parliament.

It is not acceptable that that the European Parliament currently operates from three cities in three different countries adding hundreds of millions of euro to your tax bill every year.

We will fight to end this expensive practice.

Spending Accountability
The error rate on EU budget spending was almost 5% in 2012 according to the annual report by the European Court of Auditors, published in November 2013.

Member States are still not doing enough to protect the 80% of EU funds that they manage.

Fianna Fáil wants to streamline and simplify EU rules so that they are more transparent, easier to apply and enforce in order to avoid waste and error. More needs to be done to protect taxpayers’ money being misspent by both Member States and the European Union.

We will call for increased accountability and transparency in all budgetary issues and for an audit of all existing EU agencies. Those that do not deliver significant added value should be abolished.

A More Democratic EU
Fianna Fáil supports a reinforcement of the democratic nature of the European Union, with a greater involvement of the European and national parliaments in decisionmaking, and with greater transparency of negotiations and voting within the Council of European Union.

Seanad Éireann should be given a stronger role in scrutinising EU legislation and should take a lead role in policing the subsidiarity principle of the EU.

Lobbying Regulations
The EU institutions pass legislation which affects over 500 million people in Europe every year. Fianna Fáil believes that in order to ensure the integrity of this legislation, strong regulation of lobbyists must be enacted at an EU level similar to regulations which currently exist in the United States. The European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) must be given full powers to investigate decisions of EU institutions and their actions. Further wide ranging powers and extensive resources should be considered for OLAF.

Europe’s Role in the World

Enlargement

Fianna Fáil believes that the EU’s Enlargement policy is one of the most effective foreign policy tools the Union has at its disposal.

However, our Party believes that it is important to bed down the new EU legislative structures introduced in the Treaty of Lisbon and throughout the ongoing building of economic stability in the EU before any further enlargement occurs.

As the Union decides on how best to face the future, neighbouring countries should be accommodated through the use of Partnerships which accord increasing bilateral relations between the EU and the third-party country but does not result in full membership of the EU in the short term.

Promoting Human Rights

Promoting and protecting universal human rights must be at the heart of Europe’s foreign policy. This must be reflected in all aspects of EU policy including in trade negotiations.

Ireland must use its influence within the EU to raise and promote the improvement of human rights across the world.

EU Aid Volunteers
Fianna Fáil fully supports the EU Aid Volunteers initiative. This volunteer group will provide a path for Europeans eager to help the victims of crises and disasters. It will provide technical assistance, helping people outside the EU to understand European culture, and helping EU citizens to understand the cultures of other countries. The volunteers’ work would relate to social and economic development.

Middle East
Fianna Fáil believes the EU should continue to support any efforts to achieve a two state solution in the conflict between Israel and Palestine.

We are deeply concerned at the continuing advance of Israeli settlements in Palestinian territory which are both illegal and make the two-state solution increasingly unlikely.

The EU should seek to ban all Israeli settlement goods from the EU’s internal market.

The EU should also press for Palestine to become a party of the International Criminal Court.

Fighting Climate Change
Fianna Fáil believes that Europe must lead in the fight against climate change.

We must ensure that the EU supports sustainable, sensible and renewable energy policies at a European level. The EU must also ensure that our international partners keep their commitments to reduce the causes of climate change internationally. Fianna Fáil fully supports plans to integrate our national grid into the European energy market in order to secure our energy supply.

Fianna Fáil will support policies which reduce European dependency on outside energy resources. The EU must pursue policies which increase energy security and stability within the Union. We need a European energy policy which shields Europe from destabilising external political actors who use energy resources as a political tool.

