Introduction:

Politics With A Value System

The Green Party/Comhaontas Glas has developed a deserved reputation for being the political party (1029 with the most concern for the environment. While being successful in highlighting and forcing the political bytes) system to respond to environmental issues, being seen as the e‘ nvironmental’ party has also become something of a straitjacket that has restricted Greens from highlighting our wider policy agenda. These local elections offer an ideal opportunity to inform the electorate as to how wide the Green agenda is.

Irish politics is filled with political parties who differ not at all from each other. Only the Green Party can truly claim to be distinct. Local authorities are badly in need of a fresh approach. Only the Green Party is offering the electorate that choice.

Four policy pillars inform Green Party thinking.
Social Justice
Grassroots Democracy
Equality 
The Environment

From these pillars all other policies follow. These are the values that the Green Party will seek to put in place in local councils, and they will inform the policy positions we will be highlighting within this manifesto, and later hopefully in the council chambers throughout the country.

Social Justice
Despite a booming economy we live in a grossly unequal society, where success is still too dependent on where you live, how well connected or situated you or your family is, your opportunity to be educated, and even the ability to move from place to place.

Grassroots Democracy
The Green Party/Comhaontas Glas believes that the way decisions are made is often as important, if not (1029 more so, than actual decisions made. The overriding principle should be that any person who is affected bytes) by the making of a decision should be involved in the making of such decisions. We rigorously oppose any attempt to take power further away from people, and in seeking election to political structures we attempt to redistribute power, so that all decisions are made at the most local level possible.

Bringing about a better democracy means assisting people in becoming better informed, engaging in wider consultation, and ensuring that properly agreed decisions are quickly and effectively implemented. It means changing from a 'winner takes all' system of politics to a system where everyone is a winner.

Equality
The world of politics is too oriented by grey middle aged, able bodied men. It is a world where point (1029 scoring is thought more important than issues, where he who shouts loudest is thought more of than he bytes) who argues best. How meetings are organised and where they are held, favour men over women highlighting issues that are important to men, while ignoring issues vital to women. There are too few women in politics. Not only should there be more women in politics, but our system also needs to be changed by feminist values. Equally, minority interests are not only having their views heard, they are not being allowed to be seen to represent themselves.

The Environment
Environmental issues will always remain high on the Green agenda, but we believe that we have (1029 environmental problems because of how decisions are made, and how we structure society and the bytes) economy. Our priority will be to maintain and protect and enhance our environment - improving the very quality of life.

Through a significant Green Party presence on local councils, we intend to challenge the style and the culture of how local government operates. Among our objectives will be: Changing the timing and structure of council meetings to maximise public participation. Arranging for the holding of meetings in local community venues.

Restructuring the decision making process so that consultation is engaged at the beginning and not towards the end of any process.

Ensuring that Strategic Policy Committees are made to have an active part in the decision making process of local councils, and that the nominated members from outside bodies of these committees can be made feel fully involved.

Increasing the ability of local councils to bring about legislation through the passing of byelaws.

Refusing to participate in exclusive pacts designed to create j‘ obs for the boys’, working to see that appointed positions within the councils are done fairly and on merit.

Improving reporting procedures from outside agencies (Health Board, Vocational Education Committee), with the holding of debates and the producing of regular reports. Actively opposing attempts by any public representative who operates a Dual Mandate to be appointed to any outside body or agency. The Green Party/Comhaontas Glas actively opposes and does not operate the Dáil/ local authority dual mandate.

Developing a code of practice whereby knowledge and information gained through attendance at conferences and seminars can be made more widely available.

Producing proposals that would allow for the regular holding of local referenda and initiatives.

To double spending on Community Development, on a year on year basis, during the lifetime of the next local councils.
To devise ways in which expenditure can be directly allocated and used within local communities, by recognised community groupings
To make use of a Community Forum where potential areas of controversy can be first aired, and methods of eliminating conflict can be agreed.
To have implemented within the City and County Development Plans a minimum standard of community facilities to exist in each identified community.
To campaign to have Community Employment schemes restructured into volunteer support programmes, recognising the valuable work such schemes do in local communities.
To transform twinning arrangements with sister councils onto a more community oriented focus.

Housing
The provision of housing has become this country's most serious social problem. As Housing Authorities, local authorities will be pushed by the Green Party to properly fulfill their obligations in this by

Ensuring that each council operates an open system of housing allocation, so housing applicants can visually see where they stand and how long they have to wait to secure housing.

Developing a Housing policy that concentrates house building on derelict sites rather than green field sites; that limits the number of houses that can be built on any one site; and that rules out the use of multi-storey apartment blocks.

Adopting the widespread use of effective Estate management schemes, allowing for proper maintenance budgets being spent in local communities

Encouraging the development of rural resettlement schemes.

Exempting from stamp duty all houses under the value of £150,000 Re-introducing Certificates of Reasonable Value to curb developers profit margins. Working to ensure that sufficient serviced halting stop spaces, and varied accomodation types are made available to meet the needs of the Travelling Community, in consultation with travellers and travellers groups, eliminating the practice of unofficial road side sites. Encouraging the settling of refugees in a sensitive and proportionate way, that will help make an appropriate response to the difficulties that such people find themselves in, and will add to the cultural make up of our population.

Ensuring that all future housing is fully accessible to people of all abilities.

Developing a plan to identify and acquire institutional land for use in housing development.

Substantially increasing funding for social housing, increasing the unit grant available, and raising the percentage that can be retain by voluntary housing agencies Improving security systems, especially in housing areas where large numbers of tenants are elderly.

Promoting the instant transfer of properties, to stem vandalism, speed up housing transfers, and reduce maintenance costs.

Insisting that housing repairs will be made within the shortest period of time through the introduction of a Tenants Charter.

Encouraging the use of materials in the building and repairing of houses that will lead to near maintenance free housing, using materials that are energy efficient and will help reduce house running costs.

Economic Development and Planning
The Celtic Tiger has become a much abused animal. Undoubtedly there has been an increase in (1029 economic prosperity, but recent job losses show how fragile this economy can be. With new powers for bytes) local government, the Green Party believes that local councils can play a stronger role in developing the economic future of their regions. Fás, the IDA, and the City Enterprise Board should make regular reports and presentations to these councils.

Local authorities should consider making more adventurous use of their rates collection systems to act as an incentive to encourage business as to where its locates and the physical appearance it shows. For example better frontage and signage can be achieved using such methods. The emphasis should be placed on encouraging medium sized Irish based industries to develop and prosper. Overdependence on large multi-national companies could bring us back to a Fords or Dunlops in Cork, Fruit of the Loom in Donegal, or Packard Electric in Tallaght situation.

We believe in the importance of the social economy, and will discourage the use of employment schemes such as Community Employment in providing work that otherwise should be full timeemployment (e.g. janitors, school secretaries etc.). Further we believe in increasing the numbers of places available in such schemes for more effective use in voluntary, community programmes. Local authorities should be playing a major role in developing the tourism potential of their regions.

Our basic planning principles should be that we preserve rather than knock, and that we build in harmony with what is there, rather than accepting buildings for buildings sake.

Information on planning needs to improve, we would favour the adoption of the Scottish system of informing all residents within a set distance of a planning development, by letter.

Retention planning permission should no longer be available, either permission exists beforehand or no building work should take place. We favour the need for planning permission to be sought before the removal of hedgerows over large areas.

We favour the promotion of tree-linked development where every planning permission given for each housing unit should be accompanied by a condition to plant a tree.

We also need to present a system of planning that is as open as we need our system of politics to be. We must work to avoid the appearance of collusion with corrupt interests that have produced the current tribunals of inquiry.

Funding Local Government
The Green Party will continue to oppose service charges. We believe that any money collected should be instead of, and not in addition to national taxation. We favour services being free at the point of use, with any charges being made to discourage the abuse of these services. We support stronger legislation against the making of spurious compensation claims that have been such a huge drain on the finances of local authorities.

The Environment
Air Quality
Having campaigned successfully to have a smoke free zone created in Dublin, in Cork, and in several (1029 other urban centres and having secured the closure of many hospital incinerators throughout the bytes) country, the Green Party will continue to make the improvement of air quality a priority. We will be working for

A comprehensive health survey to measure the extent of respiratory conditions, in particular childhood asthma, and the developing of a tracking system to see whether the numbers suffering from these conditions is lessening or increasing.

Increasing the number of air monitoring stations, measuring for more air pollutants, at half hourly peaks instead of 24 hour averages.

Better monitoring to halt the sale and use of smoky coal, which has been steadily increasing. 

To insist that the treatment of sewage is done to the most advanced level possible, appropriate for the population area being catered for.

To adopt a get tough policy in relation to the far too regular pollution of waterways.

To challenge the continuing addition of fluoride to drinking water supplies.

To ensure that Regional Fisheries Boards be given much stronger powers to deal with marine and freshwater pollution and other threats to fisheries and water quality.

Waste and Litter
EU and Irish laws should be prohibiting, wherever feasible, the manufacture of goods destined solely for disposal. 

Producer Responsibility Obligations (PROs) requiring industrial, agriculture and commercial facilities to prevent and minimise waste production need to be greatly extended and enforced. We consider Repak, established in 1995 by IBEC and the Department of the Environment, to have been an abject failure.

Deposit/refund schemes should be re-institutued for beverage containers.

Separation of waste must become mandatory - Irish recycling levels at 8% are the second lowest in the EU.

Policy needs to be developed to deal with Construction and Demolition waste, vastly growing through the building boom. Much of this waste has a reuse value.

Landfill sites, where they exist, should be of limited size and of fixed tenure, situated as close as possible to where waste is being produced.

We oppose any attempt to use incineration, even when promoted as Waste to Energy, as a means of dealing with the waste problem. We remain opposed because incineration merely transfers the waste problem into another form. Far from decreasing the amount being produced, incineration needs

Introduce a name and shame policy for litter offenders.

Agenda 21
To push local councils into having real consultation with local communities in helping to produce an (1029 environmental plan (Agenda 21). Such a plan should be updated each year through an annual report, containing proactive environmental policies on areas such as protecting and enhancing the built environment; preserving and increasing green space and amenity areas; introducing a tree protection plan; and promoting the use of environmental materials.
To include in local Agenda 21s the need for greater numbers of pollution officers in each local authority.
Every Borough Corporation should develop its own 'urban forestry' strategy.
We will continue to encourage the continued co-ordination of local authorities in their combined opposition to the Sellafield nuclear plant, and nuclear facilities throughout Britain.

Masts and Pylons
We will oppose the construction of any further electricity pylons, and seek to have a programme (1029 implemented that will replace existing pylons, freeing land that can be made available for housing or amenity use.
We will campaign against any increase in mobile phone or communications masts, insisting that existing facilities will be shared. We will be seeking that planning permission for these structures be reviewed on a regular basis.

Animal Rights
Halt the killing of badgers with snares. Lobby for funding for badger vaccine as a means of controlling bovine TB.

Roads and Transport
The Green Party will be encouraging local authorities to change the emphasis of its roads bytes) and transport policies by Allocating money to repair roads before building new roads.
Introducing more restricted traffic systems, barring large vehicles from travelling or parking on many city and town streets.
Prioritising footpath repair before road repairs.
Increasing the pedestrianisation programme to produce largely car free City and Town Centres.
Reducing reliance on City Centre Multi-Storey car parks, and increasing use of out of town park and ride facilities.
Reviewing facilities and regulations as they apply to taxi-cabs, to encourage widest possible use, taking particular care in ensuring that licenses granted for wheelchair accessible taxis are used mainly for this use.
Doubling the length of cycleways available, on a year on year basis, to complete a nationwide cycleways network within the next five years. Identifying and passing bye-laws that will allow cyclists greater advantage in using the roads network.
Introducing far more bus priority routes to cut bus journey times.
Introducing a national school bus programme. This will also help eliminate morning and

Health and Childcare
The Green Party will be seeking that local councils have greater involvement with Health services and (1029 Health issues. To be more responsive to the needs of the people this is very necessary, especially in bytes) relation to health services and women. Issues such as domestic violence towards women demands a more proactive response from local councils in highlighting the existence of the problem, and in providing material support. On the issue of child care, local authorities have a responsibility to provide child care facilities at its administrative and recreational centres.

The record of investment in childcare in Ireland is very low by European standards. Within the EU Ireland has the lowest employment rate of mothers with children under 10 years of age. Irish parents spend two and half times more on child care than elsewhere in Europe.

Managing the social crisis caused through the abuse and misuse of drugs needs radically different approaches. We decry the continuing failure to provide professional, properly resourced treatment centres for young people suffering from drug abuse, and we are especially worried that children under the age of fifteen are totally uncatered for in this regard.

There needs to be greater liaison in identifying and dealing with risks that come about through poor environmental conditions, for example air quality. In nominating members to sit on the various Health Boards, local authorities need to insist that such policies come into being.

The purchasing policies of local authorities and health boards should also be examined to ensure that best health policies can be promoted, for example by refusing to purchase any genetically modified food.

Disability
The Green Party/Comhaontas Glas undertakes to ensure that all public buildings become wheelchair
Any person appointed to a public body to represent disability interests must only be done so after appropriate consultation with the relevant disability groups.

Agriculture, The Marine and Rural Development
To oppose the closure of any further essential services in rural communities based on population criteria, (1029 and on developing new criteria based on distance from such services. 
Encourage the development of open markets in all towns, particularly for the sale of local produce.
Use purchasing power of local authorities to assist organic, small scale, less intensive farming.
To draw up and implement local plans for integrated coastal zone management Each Council or Region to designate marine nature reserves and seek support from national and EU authorities
Local action plans for small fishing ports, processing plants, hatcheries and restocking projects of suitable species in new sanctuary areas.

Education and the Youth Service
Through their involvement with the Vocational Education Committees, local authorities similarly need to (1029 promote better educational policies. The problem of adult literacy needs greater resources and a more proactive approach from state agencies. The developing Youth Service needs recognition from local councils in maximising use of all current public facilities and in ensuring that facilities are provided where none exist.

Emergency Services
The Green Party will work to ensure that emergency services – the Fire Brigade and the Civil Defence are given the maximum amount of resources necessary to be kept in a state of constant readiness in the

Recreation and Amenity
The Green Party will work to enhance and improve upon Local Authority recreational facilities by: 
Restructuring the admission charges for recreational facilities, so that senior citizens, young people and the unemployed can access these facilities at minimal or no cost, helping to maximise participation.
Bringing about a large increase in the number of playground facilities, by developing the concept of No Insurance Zones.
Fully utilising waterfronts to construct riverside walks.

Arts and Culture
We need greater investment in the Arts. Not enough use is made of the responsibilities of local (1029 authorities under the Arts Act to make such expenditure. Green Party/Comhaontas Glas representatives will encourage local authorities to take their responsibilities towards the Arts by:

Placing a greater community emphasis on arts activities
Continuing to increase resources to libraries putting particular emphasis on information technology.
Popularising the use of museums and archive centres.
