FOREWORD

LETTER FROM PARTY PRESIDENT

We in Sinn Féin are leaders. We stand up for what is right, we take risks for peace and we hold the powerful to account.

We keep our word and when we say we are going to do something, we do it.

Four strong Sinn Féin MEPs went to Europe to fight for Irish interests.

Our MEPs now need to continue that fight – for communities, for ordinary working people and families.

Sinn Féin MEPs stood up for the Good Friday Agreement and for Irish interests in the face of the Tory Brexit agenda. We were first to pursue the idea of Special Designated Status for the north of Ireland within Europe – a policy, which has now been widely accepted.

Team Sinn Féin stood up to the banks and confronted vulture funds, fought hard against water charges, the erosions of our neutrality and demanded investment in rural Ireland.

Sinn Féin wants to see a fair and prosperous Ireland.

Nobody who goes out to work every day, or is forced to stay at home through disability or because they are caring for others, should struggle to pay their bills or keep a roof over their head.

No older person should be faced with the indignity of lying on a hospital trolley when seriously ill.

Nobody should have to go to the courts to fight for their rights.

No one should live in fear in their home or community.

We will not stand for it.

We are fighting back.

We want radical reform in Europe with more power returned to member states.

We want Irish neutrality recognised and protected.

We want strong action on climate change but oppose carbon taxes.

We want support for rural Ireland with no community left behind.

We will stand up for Ireland’s interests in the Brexit negotiations and believe that now is the time for Irish Unity.

Sinn Féin will fight for you.

Sinn Féin will fight for your community. Sinn Féin will fight for Ireland.

Mary Lou McDonald TD UACHTARÁN SINN FÉIN

Executive Summary

The Sinn Féin team of MEPs are part of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) group in the European Parliament. What unites this group of 52 MEPs is the vision of a socially equitable, sustainable and peaceful Europe based on international solidarity.

Sinn Féin MEPs work together in the Parliament fighting for workers rights, public services and a fair and democratic Europe.

In contrast, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael belong to the Right-wing EPP and ALDE groups which want to create a Superstate centralising power in Europe far away from ordinary people. These groups are also determined to create an EU army with more military spending rather than investing to tackle the cost of living and provide quality public services. They are advocates of austerity and beholden to corporate interests.

Sinn Féin reject increased militarisation and related spending and will fight for ordinary people.

It is only by voting for Sinn Féin that you will get credible and effective MEPs who will fight for ordinary Irish people’s interests in Europe, challenge vested interests and insiders and work for a radically and progressively reformed European Union.

BREXIT

There is no good to come from Brexit for Ireland.

In 2016 a majority of people in the North voted to Remain and for the whole of Ireland to stay in the EU together.

Brexit is unwanted and is being foisted upon our people, businesses and key sectors of the economy bringing great uncertainty and instability.

Recognising our special and unique circumstances, and the fact that we have a peace process which is underpinned by the Good Friday Agreement for over twenty years, Sinn Féin adopted a policy calling for ‘Designated Special Status’ for the North.

We cannot withstand exclusion customs union or single market.

We cannot return to borders of the past.

One of the greatest symbols of our peace is the invisible border which has enhanced the social cohesion and economic integration of our island.

Sinn Féin support the Withdrawal Agreement - with the backstop - as the least worst Brexit option, which will protect jobs, trade and avoid a hardening of the border.

Working with Border Communities Against Brexit, with farmers and businesses, with human rights activists, women’s groups, youth and student organisations, Sinn Féin has helped influence the Brexit negotiations within the European Parliament and put Ireland’s interests and the Good Friday Agreement at the centre.

We have prioritised that the EU remains committed to continued cross-border funding.

IN THE COMING PERIOD:

We will seek to ensure that the north elects representatives who reflect the views of the majority of people who wish to remain within the EU;

We will seek to ensure that the pathway to Irish unity outlined in the Good Friday Agreement is mirrored by a pathway to rejoin the EU;

We will seek EU support for unity through an approach that prioritises cross-border rules, standards, rights, and social and economic integration.

Promoting Irish Unity

The Brexit crisis has created unprecedented political uncertainty across the entire island. Irish citizens in the north who voted to remain must not be dragged out of the EU against their wishes. The Good Friday Agreement sets out a pathway for Irish reunification through a unity referendum. In the wake of the Brexit vote, there is growing support for such a referendum.

Sinn Féin MEPs will continue to build support for a unity referendum and the convening of an all-Ireland forum on Irish unity.

It is essential that both governments plan for such a referendum, setting out the political, economic, social and cultural changes that will come about. We know that all-Ireland health and education systems will deliver better outcomes for patients and contribute to the growth and sustainability of the allIreland economy. We know that infrastructure planning on an all-island basis will allow for people and communities to reach their full potential by creating employment and economic opportunity.

We need to prepare for Irish unity. One of those with a major responsibility in this area, the Irish government, is reluctant to undertake its duty to help prepare our citizens, north and south, for the changes that will be needed. This must change. The Irish government needs to begin the process of preparing for Irish reunification. It needs to take the lead in bringing all sections of society, north and south together to plan for an orderly constitutional transfer. The people of this island need to be part of the debate about their future.

Sinn Féin is committed to building a prosperous and inclusive society based on justice, fairness and equality.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT TO:

Build political support in Europe and in Ireland to bring about Irish reunification;

Ensure that the EU makes a financial contribution to support a reunified Ireland;

Build support in Europe for the development of a White Paper and an all-Ireland Forum on Irish unity.

Reforming the European Union

Sinn Féin is working to build a fairer and more democratic EU. A European Union that works for the people of Europe, not for the EU insiders, middle-men and corporate interests. Greater transparency must be introduced, the militarisation agenda halted, social protections legally bolstered and powers returned to member states.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

The introduction of a mandatory Transparency Register to clean up corporate lobbying;

An end to secret voting in the Council which allows governments to hide positions from the public;

A reduction of unnecessary bureaucracy to simplify application processes for community and voluntary sector, farmers and business;

Enhanced national sovereignty;

A Social Progress Protocol to the EU Treaty.

Building a Social Europe

Sinn Féin is committed to public services. The EU Fiscal Compact is an economic straitjacket that prevents member states from boosting public spending even when this is badly needed. It does this by imposing one-size-fits-all rules on debt and deficits that are just not suitable. These rules severely limit our ability to invest our own money on critical things like health, housing and childcare.

Likewise, EU rules on competition and State Aid can prohibit interventions aimed at protecting jobs in sectors facing particular challenges, protecting core services like post offices or making cheaper options available to the public in areas like insurance. Sinn Féin MEPs will reject the move to enshrine the Fiscal Compact Intergovernmental Treaty into permanent EU law. Together with our allies in the European Parliament we will pursue the goal of re-nationalising macroeconomic policy and fiscal powers.

EU banking policy, which is driven by unelected officials, favours banks and corporate elites at the expense of ordinary people. The ECB’s quantitative easing programme is pumping billions into the banks to the benefit of corporations and major polluters. It should be replaced by the direct transfer of newly created money to governments so they can engage in green investment and by quantitative easing for the people ie payments to households. And the EU’s current proposal to deal with nonperforming loans aims to ‘deepen the market’ for such loans. In reality this proposal will give free reign to the Vulture Funds and amounts to a second bail-out for banks. The proposal should be withdrawn.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

An easing of State Aid rules for vulnerable sectors of the economy;

An end to the Eurozone straitjacket;

Reform of the ECB and monetary policy that works for the people;

Greater regulation of banks and vulture funds.

Militarisation, Neutrality

With the full support of Fine Gael, Fianna Fáil and their partners in Europe the EU is increasingly becoming a military union. The launch of the EU’s military co-operation programme PESCO and the creation of funds for the arms industry will further jeopardise Irish neutrality, our respected international reputation for UN peacekeeping and divert vital public money away from EU funds such as CAP and cohesion which are being cut. Sinn Féin is opposed to PESCO and to Irish money being used to fund companies who are exporting arms and fuelling conflicts around the world.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

A specific protocol attached to the EU treaties on Irish neutrality similar to that secured by Denmark;

No EU money to the arms industry;

An Irish withdrawal from the EU’s permanent military structured cooperation (PESCO);

A ban on the export of EU manufactured arms to countries in conflict;

EU recognition and respect for neutral member states defence policy;

No Irish money to be used for military projects in other member states.

Tax justice and tax sovereignty

The Lux Leaks, Panama Papers, Paradise Papers and other leaks have revealed the massive extent of corporate tax dodging, corruption and money laundering by the world’s richest individuals and corporations. Experts estimate that governments are losing US$500 billion every single year as a result of tax avoidance by multinational corporations.

While we insist on each member state’s right to determine its own tax system, Sinn Féin recognises the need for EU and international agreements to end tax avoidance by the wealthiest corporations in the world. Sinn Féin advocates for a public country-by-country reporting by the largest multinationals of their turnover, profits and tax paid. We also demand the Irish government end its expensive and wasteful appeal against the Commission in the Apple case. The €14 billion deposited by Apple in an escrow account could be used to invest in vital things like housing, health and childcare.

SINN FÉIN WILL FIGHT FOR:

The Irish government to defend our veto on taxation matters in the Council;

Any fundamental changes in global taxation to take place at the international level;

The Irish government to end its position of blocking public country-by-country reporting for the largest multinational corporations in the Council;

The Irish government to fully implement the agreed EU-wide initiatives to increase transparency and tackle tax avoidance such as the Directives on Administrative Cooperation (information-sharing) and the Anti-Tax Avoidance Directives;

An end to the Irish government’s expensive, wasteful and futile appeal against the Commission’s state aid on the sweetheart tax deals granted by Revenue to Apple;

The swift and full implementation of all aspects of the fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive, delayed by the Irish government, including for full registers of beneficial owners of companies to be publicly available.

Championing workers’ rights - better jobs and better pay

The same parties and institutions who imposed destructive austerity policies now preside over a one-sided and unfair recovery. Unemployment has dropped but insecure employment with low wages has risen. EU law currently prioritises corporate interests and the single market over the rights of ordinary people. Sinn Féin believe the EU could and should play a greater role in protecting workers’ and trade union rights. We will campaign for a binding ‘Social Progress Protocol’ to the EU Treaty to guarantee that pay and employment conditions cannot be undermined by rulings of the ECJ.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Full employment based on high quality and stable jobs;

A living wage and against bogus sub-contracting;

An end to zero-hours contracts, precarious work and privatisation;

Positive incentives and other measures to enable people to overcome barriers to employment;

Ending gender discrimination and the gender pay gap, with effective enforcement mechanisms;

Mandatory trade union recognition and greater protection for workers through collective bargaining and defending the right to strike;

Workers’ access to well-funded and effective life-long learning and re-training, including through targeted Social Clauses in procurement contracts and explicit targets in EU funding programmes;

A reversal of the race-to-the-bottom with equal rights and protections for all workers.

Climate Change, Environment, Sustainability

Climate change is a crisis of under-regulated capitalism – a system that has allowed big polluters to turn a profit without taking into account the consequences on our planet. The EU’s market solutions approach has failed. The Irish government’s suggestion that householders be punished for their failures with increased carbon taxes will likewise fail because affordable energy and transport alternatives do not exist for ordinary people. We need to fully enforce binding targets on the biggest polluters, significantly increase public investment in the roll-out of affordable alternatives for householders and commuters and ensure a full decarbonisation of our economies before 2050.

SINN FÉIN WILL FIGHT FOR:

No carbon tax hikes;

Establishment of a robust strategy for decarbonising the economy before 2050 through investment in alternatives;

Divestment from fossil fuels in all member states, similar to the Irish Fossil Fuel Divestment Act;

An EU wide ban on hydraulic fracturing (fracking), as well as the import of fracked gas;

Full transposition of the Habitat’s Directive and meeting all biodiversity targets;

Full implementation of the Single Use Plastics Directive.

Trade Agreements

The Lisbon Treaty bestowed dangerous new negotiating powers on the Commission which it has used to pursue a ‘New Generation’ of trade agreements that further threaten public services, environmental protection and our own right to regulate. These new agreements encourage a race to the bottom and open up markets in which only the super multinationals will thrive. Sinn Féin oppose the Multilateral Investment Court which the Commission, with the support of Fine Gael, is seeking to create. This court gives companies the right to sue a democratically elected government for policy changes that affect their profits.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT AGAINST:

Trading away of our democracy and rights through these agreements;

The establishment of the Multilateral Investment Court.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Fairer trade deals which respect member state sovereignty;

The protection of public services and our environment from bad trade deals.

Rural Development

Sinn Féin has been fighting for Ireland’s rural interests in Europe. We have been lobbying for protected quality schemes for Irish products and the provision of free WiFi access in public spaces through the WiFi 4 EU scheme. We greatly value the LEADER Programme’s investment contribution to often neglected rural areas and believe the programme should be put back in the hands of local people via community-led local development companies. We call for a State Aid exemption for rural areas in light of Brexit and urge the reduction of bureaucracy so that a greater portion of EU funding for things like broadband actually reaches the intended beneficiaries instead of being pocketed by middle-men.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT:

For the LEADER Programme to be put back in the hands of local people and for continued access to Leader funds for the North post-Brexit;

For a State Aid exemption for rural and peripheral areas on the basis of Brexit;

For EU money for broadband services to cease becoming entangled in EU bureaucracy and ending up in the pockets of consultancies and foreign capital investment firms;

Against the commercialisation of our rural areas through EU level Schemes such as that which has seen the plantation of large swaths of rural land with invasive forest species, with little or no return or consultation of rural communities;

For both rural-proofing and island proofing of legislation;

For an Islands Intergroup to be set up in the European Parliament, to be the first dedicated forum through which to discuss the needs of island territories.

Agriculture, CAP

Farm incomes are deeply unequal and for many small farmers are unsustainably low. The re-design of the Common Agricultural Policy post-2020 provides an opportunity to correct current imbalances and protect the family farm model. Sinn Féin opposes any cuts to pillar I or pillar II of the CAP. We advocate an upper payment limit of €60,000 to improve the spread of financial support. We also propose ending the unjust system of historical entitlement.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Continued access to CAP funding for farmers in the North post-Brexit;

An upper payment limit of €60,000 to improve the spreading of financial support, and a redistributive payment to ensure farmers get extra support on the first 15 hectares declared;

A move to harmonise per hectare payments by 2023;

A proportionate system of penalties that takes into the consideration the economic situation of the farmer;

A ban on unfair trading practices such as below cost selling;

An increase to the minimum national spend on young farmers and a scheme to assist young farmers to purchase land;

Simplified ECO schemes in pillar I and pillar II that remunerate farmers fairly;

A Common Agricultural Policy that allows farmers to be the custodians of the environment, based on smaller scale farming that encourages ecological development;

The environmental schemes within CAP to properly incentivise conservation, environmental protection and biodiversity.

Fisheries, the Marine, Coastal Communities, Islands

Local fisheries are suffering while profit-driven super-trawlers controlled by multi-nationals devastate our environment, fish stocks and coastal communities. The term Common Fisheries Policy has become a byword for bankruptcy and bureaucracy. The CFP needs to be reformed to sustain our oceans, to sustain our fishermen, local economies and coastal communities.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Radical reform of the Common Fisheries Policy;

Increased infrastructure to support Irish coastal communities and our islands;

Transferring more decision-making back to Ireland;

Protection against super-trawlers;

Expanding EU funding to help Irish fishing communities and to protect the environment;

An equal and mutually beneficial fishing deal for Ireland following Brexit.

Equality for all Regions

There has been little or no sign of recovery in several regions on the island of Ireland. The West and Border Regions in particular have been starved by both governments of the funding they badly need. Sinn Féin MEPs oppose the Commission’s proposal to invest in militarisation by plundering Regional Development Funding. We also campaigned and secured commitments to maintain Interreg and Peace IV funding to the north and border areas post-Brexit.

SINN FEIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

EU transport funding for the Western Rail Corridor, and the Western Arc stretching from Derry to Cork;

Protection of EU funding streams to the north, border and rural regions post-Brexit;

The Irish government to draw down funding for the areas that need it most and oppose regressive changes to European Funding streams;

Cross-border infrastructure projects to link regions of Ireland and prevent further development overly-centralised on Dublin.

Protecting Public Services

Tax avoidance by major multi-nationals and the militarisation agenda favoured by both Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil and their respective groups in the European Parliament diminish the money available for investment in vital public services.

Successive European Commission proposals have driven an agenda of privatisation to the detriment of public services. Public Private Partnerships are a big part of this agenda. The Irish public recently witnessed in our school buildings the chaotic consequences of this financially wasteful approach and Sinn Féin will continue to resist this agenda.

In its latest power grabbing effort, the Commission is proposing to give itself an advance veto on the attempts national legislators might want to make to improve the accessibility, quality and affordability of services. Under the ‘new notification procedure’ proposed to enforce the Services Directive the Commission would have to be given three months’ notice of draft proposals that place requirements on service providers. The unelected and secretive Commission would have the power to decide a proposal is not permissible. We would be prohibited from introducing it and would have to bring an appeal to the ECJ before we could act. This is bad for services and bad for democracy.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT:

For the right of local councils, the Dáil and the Assembly to legislate around the provision of services in the interests of the public and the environment. We will demand this proposal for a new services ‘notification’ procedure is withdrawn;

To oppose the Commission’s drive towards the privatisation of public services such as transport. We will resist the expansion of public-private partnerships, which amount to creeping privatisation of public services, whenever it is proposed as a pseudo-solution to the EU’s economic problems.

Water

The Irish people demonstrated in their hundreds of thousands that clean tap water is a fundamental right to be provided by the state - not a commodity to be sold and purchased.

The EU agenda of charges and privatisation must be put to an end once and for all. The Sinn Féin team of MEPs has been working hard to ensure subsidiarity on water management and to consolidate Ireland’s derogation on domestic water charges. Next year the Water Framework Directive will be recast – it is vital the Sinn Féin MEPs are re-elected to ensure this derogation from domestic water charges is copper fastened.

The European Commission is taking enforcement proceedings against the Irish government for its failure to invest in waste water treatment. If penalties and fines are to be avoided adequate investment is needed.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT TO:

Ensure the EU fully implement the demands of the European Citizen’s Initiative Right2Water and put an end to the privatisation agenda, particularly in relation to water management;

Copper fasten the derogation to domestic water charges in Art 9.4 in the Water Framework Directive, ensuring that the Irish state can make its own decision on the matter;

Ensure high quality drinking water for all by investing in water treatment infrastructure;

Introduce greater transparency so that we do not have a repeat of Commissioner Vella’s political interference in how Ireland decides to manage its water.

Promoting Human Rights and Equality

Sinn Féin use the platform of the European Parliament to highlight human rights abuses across the world and to promote a rights-based society. We believe the EU could do a lot more to promote equality and human rights and enshrine them in EU law, particularly by incorporating social rights into its legislation.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Ireland to fully comply with all human rights obligations under the ECHR and European Social Charter;

EU support for an Acht Gaeilge in the North of Ireland;

EU support for the adoption of an All-Ireland Charter of Rights to harmonise guarantees, as provided for under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement;

Social rights to be included within relevant European legislation, such as the right to housing, the right to energy and the right to water;

All legislation to be gender-proofed and disability-proofed so that women and people with disabilities are not negatively affected by any legislation;

LGBT+ appropriate medical care and recognition of unions and families across the EU.

Promoting the Irish language and minority languages in the EU

There are 55 million speakers of regional, minority or lesser used language in Europe, many of whom face discrimination.

Sinn Féin fought hard for the recognition of Irish as an official language of the EU. We will campaign for speaking rights in Irish to be rolled out at Committee level, as it is in the plenary.

We also advocate that a European Language Ombudsman be established.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT FOR:

Speaking rights in Irish to be rolled out at a committee level in the Parliament, just as it is in the plenary;

A European Language Ombudsman to act as a watchdog for states who engage in discrimination against a person’s language rights and advise on how to mitigate instances of language discrimination in the EU.

International solidarity

Sinn Féin has always been a party of international solidarity. We know from Ireland’s own struggle, the value and strength this solidarity can bring. In the European Parliament, Sinn Féin has helped give a voice to oppressed people struggling for peace, democracy and self-determination in Europe and around the world – including Palestine and Catalonia.

Sinn Féin supports arms embargos against human rights violators, such as Saudi Arabia, which the EU chooses to ignore. We will oppose efforts by the EU to create a foreign policy approach that undermines national sovereignty, international law and the Charter and Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

The Irish government should assert our own independent foreign policy on behalf of the Irish people.

SINN FÉIN MEPS WILL FIGHT TO:

Support struggles for national sovereignty, self-determination and human rights, both within the European Union and across the world;

Defend the right of the Palestinian people to freedom and democracy, calling for the international recognition of the State of Palestine, and building support for the two-state solution as a means to that end;

End EU preferential trade with Israel, including suspending the EU-Israel Association Agreement, and promoting the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaign as an important tool for challenging the Israeli regime’s grave human rights abuses and illegal occupation of Palestine;

Secure the release of political prisoners in the Basque Country, Catalonia, Kurdistan and elsewhere, and campaign for constructive, peaceful dialogue, and respect for democracy;

Demand that human rights safeguards, like that in the EU Trust Fund for Colombia, are properly exercised, in order to help prevent the ongoing murder of human rights, anti-war, environmental, labour and democracy activists;

Support arms embargos against human rights violators such as Saudi Arabia;

Oppose efforts by the EU to create a foreign policy approach that undermines national sovereignty, international law and the Charter and Universal Declaration of Human Rights;

Create a humanitarian response to the unfolding crisis in the Mediterranean Sea.

Sinn Féin MEP achievements

UNITED IRELAND AND PROTECTING THE PEACE PROCESS

Made Irish Unity and the demand for a unity referendum a key issue at EU level.

Hosted in the European Parliament a conference titled ‘PostBrexit: Towards A United Ireland?’ which was attended by over a 100 people, and debated the question of Irish unity with a wide range of speakers.

Negotiated and passed a strong resolution on the Irish Peace Process (www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/ document/B-8-2014-0218_EN.html)

BREXIT

Ensured that the issue of the Good Friday Agreement, no hardening of the border, rights and the need for Special Status for the north was top of the EU’s negotiating agenda

Conducted thousands of meetings with MEPs, sectors, EU diplomats and many others pressing the case for the north of Ireland in these negotiations

Campaigned for a Brexit Relief Fund to be established for struggling farmers and businesses.

Commissioned and published expert legal opinion on a number of issues, including the impact of Brexit on the Irish fishing industry, alongside briefing papers on the impact of Brexit nationally.

ECONOMY AND FUNDING

Defended Ireland’s tax sovereignty and campaigned against increased harmonisation in this area at EU level.

Opposed the EU’s attempts to promote the use of vulture funds and securitisation vehicles through a secondary market for non-performing loans.

Challenged the Irish Government’s complicity in helping large multinationals avoid paying taxes.

Secured a majority vote against the permanent inclusion of the Fiscal Compact in EU legislation.

Secured continued PEACE and INTERREG IV funding for Ireland.

Published a detailed guide to EU funding aimed at the community and voluntary sector and

Ensured Ireland used its ability to opt out of domestic, metered water charges.

Authored report calling for human right to water be recognised in law.

AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Campaigned for, and achieved for the first time an upper limit on CAP payments.

Forced the Irish Government to come forward with Flood Risk Management Plans after uncovering and exposing that the Department was failing to comply with EU legislation in this area.

Secured a compensation scheme for eel fishers.

Raised the case of corruption in the Lost at Sea Scheme.

Ensured that the Western Rail Corridor was included in a list of projects eligible for EU funding, after it was exposed that then Minister for Transport Leo Varadkar sought its exclusion.

Secured special protections and supports for Ireland’s islands and coastal communities in the 2020 European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF).

NEUTRALITY AND INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY

Consistently voted against the use of EU money for military purposes, defending Ireland’s principle of military neutrality.

Raised the legal incompatibility of the European Defence Fund with the EU Treaties on the floor of the European Parliament.

Highlighted the human rights violations against Palestine by the Israeli State and called for a ban on all products produced in illegal settlements from entering the EU and Ireland.

Member of Catalonia-EU Dialogue Platform in the European Parliament.

ENVIRONMENT

Chief author of a GUE/NGL emergency manifesto on Climate Change.

Only Irish MEP on the negotiating team of the Single Use Plastic Directive.

Challenged the influence of corporate lobbyists.

Outspoken critic of carbon tax and market based solutions that have failed to reduce emissions.

Worked on the EU Strategy on Plastics, which aims to tackle plastic pollution in our oceans.

Negotiated the Directive on the cultivation of GMOs in member states, ensuring that Ireland has a legal opt out of growing GM crops.

AN GHAEILGE

Secured an ending of the derogation against the Irish language in the European Institutions leading to the creation of hundreds of jobs for Irish graduates.

Secured a €3 million euro fund for training and recruiting Irish language interpretation and translation staff.

RIGHTS

Campaigned for the ratification by Ireland of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Campaigned for official recognition of Irish Sign Language.

Hosted a special hearing on language discrimination in Europe with participation from the Irish language Commissioner as well as counterparts and experts from several EU member-states.

Secured Parliament support for paid domestic violence leave and produced a Domestic Violence Workplace Policy.

MEDIA OWNERSHIP

Commissioned a legal report into the concentration of media ownership in Ireland.

Called and campaigned for reform of the media landscape in Ireland.

Exposed the propaganda loophole in State Advertising which means that state advertising is exempt from the advertising code and continues to call for it to rectified.

