OUR EUROPEAN UNION

From the very start, the concept of European integration and co-operation was an ambitious project. The pledge of sovereign countries to work together, in close co-operation, has transformed an historically divided Europe into one that is peaceful, stable and prosperous.

Our European Union is unique. It has come about from the free choice of the peoples of Europe. Together, we have forged a partnership based on our common values of respect for human rights, liberty, peace, democracy and economic stability.

Ireland must be at the very heart of this co-operative European Union, for it is there that our interests are best served.
• Ireland needs economic growth and secure employment.
• Ireland needs a competitive and dynamic economy, with an emphasis on regulatory reform, value for money and consumer protection.
• Ireland needs peace and security, at home and abroad.
• Ireland needs to be part of a progressive, forward thinking group of European countries that place a high value on education, equality of opportunity and personal liberty of movement and expression.

Today, the European Union is changing at a faster rate than ever before. And in a European Union that has grown beyond expectation, Ireland needs the strongest possible team to represent it within the single largest political, economic and trading bloc in the world.

In June, you will pick that team. For Ireland’s future, select the people that you know will be able to meet the challenges, and maximise the benefits, of Ireland’s membership of the European Union in the 21st century.

Now more than ever, Ireland needs the most capable, articulate and hard working MEPs that we can get. This Fine Gael team will meet the challenge.

On June 11th, empower them to work… on your side.

Our European Union is unique. It has come about from the free choice of the peoples of Europe. Together, we have forged a partnership based on our common values of respect for human rights, liberty, peace, democracy and economic stability.

FINE GAEL – THE PARTY OF EUROPE

When Ireland joined the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1973, we joined a community of nine Member States: now, the EU boasts a membership of 25, with further expansion planned.

This larger community offers us greater opportunities, but also greater challenges. And in a changing world, the EU will assume even greater importance and influence.

Since joining this common European partnership, Ireland has been transformed economically, politically and socially. For Ireland’s future, we must continue to play an active role in EU developments. And, whilst Ireland is more geographically remote than other Member States within the Union, we must never become politically at a distance.

The European Union is an evolving partnership. However, by failing to take an active role in the development of key structures at European level, the Government continues to sideline Ireland in a way that is unacceptable. For example, Fine Gael believes that Ireland must play an active role in the future peace of Europe, and the wider world. By not having a view on common foreign and security arrangements, the Government is signing Ireland out of a decisionmaking process that is critical to our future.

There are some who will say that Ireland’s membership of the European Union has diluted our national sovereignty. I challenge this assessment. Certainly, in some areas we have decided to pool decision making with other European Union Member States where we feel that this is acceptable and to our benefit. In these cases, we have as much say in their future as they have in ours.

However, in many ways, Ireland was not a fully sovereign State until we joined the European Union. In the past, our biggest export was our people, a British devaluation forced an Irish devaluation automatically, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer set interest rates, our exports were totally dependent upon a British market and our employment was over reliant on agriculture.

Today, all this has changed. We have a say at the European Central Bank. We have a healthy manufacturing and pharmaceutical base. Our financial services industries provide thousands of jobs as well as almost one third of all corporation taxes. And a thriving tourism industry has been assisted by EU investment in our infrastructural development.

The European Union has nurtured the growth of peace and prosperity in Europe for over half a century. Now, with our greatest enlargement, we must ensure that it can continue to provide the framework within which the whole continent of Europe can prosper into the future.

Fine Gael is the party of Europe. We are committed to an EU of close, mutually beneficial co-operation. This is the best way, this is the only way, to ensure the continuation of Ireland’s peace, stability and prosperity.

Since joining this common European partnership, Ireland has been transformed economically, politically and socially. For Ireland’s future we must continue to play an active role in EU developments.

THE EUROPEAN PEOPLE’S PARTY

At European level, Fine Gael is a member of the Christian Democrat grouping, the European Peoples’ Party (EPP) in the European Parliament. The EPP is the largest political grouping in Europe.

Member parties of the EPP stand for equality of opportunity, social justice and reward for effort and enterprise. The EPP aims to build an EU that is united, open, humane and diverse. Fine Gael shares these core values and aims.

Throughout its history the EPP has worked consistently to ensure that the EU evolves on the foundations of the primacy of law and respect for fundamental rights. The EPP believes this should be achieved through the sharing of power and through independent democratic institutions so as to ensure future progress serves the common interest of all Europeans.

The EPP stands for the equality of women and men, the protection of the rights of the child and minority rights, respect for life and human dignity, support for the family and solidarity with the most vulnerable in our society. The EPP stands firmly against the scourge of racism, which is a blight on modern Europe and must be tackled proactively.

We know from experience that private initiative, free enterprise, competition and free trade are driving forces behind economic progress. Of course, the freedom to do business and receive a fair profit from it is balanced by the obligation to obey the law, show respect for the environment, and work towards social development.

The EPP supports the development of a European Constitution to guarantee the common good of all European citizens. Additionally, the EPP is in favour of international co-operation so as to resolve conflicts via peaceful channels of negotiation and arbitration.

THE EUROPEAN CONSTITUTION

Fine Gael strongly supports the draft Constitutional Treaty for the European Union, and believes that a stronger European Union is good for Ireland.

The draft Constitutional Treaty is not only a strong statement of values; it is a firm statement of European constitutional law governing the actions of the European Union. It provides all of us with a bedrock from which we can build a structure of peace for this generation, and generations to come.

Importantly, the draft Constitutional Treaty will make an EU of 25 Member States more intelligible to the citizens of Europe, and introduce reforms that streamline the workings of the EU and facilitate decision-making in the enlarged Union.

The incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as an integral part of the draft Constitutional Treaty, is a major step forward. This brings human values right to the heart of the EU, and will guarantee that the EU will respect these rights in its own work in all Member States. Additionally, the draft Constitutional Treaty provides that a country may be suspended from the EU if it fails to respect the values of human dignity, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights.

By bringing everything together in one document, the draft Constitutional Treaty will be simpler, easier to read and more accessible to the European public than previous EU Treaty documents. This should promote greater levels of inclusion and discussion, which are fundamental to the quality of participative democracy that Fine Gael wants to achieve.

The draft Constitutional Treaty does not allow the EU to raise taxes, run budget deficits, raise a military force or act outside the competences given to it by the Member States.

MAKING EUROPE MORE DEMOCRATIC

The European Union has done great things for the people of Europe. But even though it has given them peace, jobs and freedom of movement, people still feel remote from it. While people can vote for their own local MEP, they do not feel that they use their vote to change the Government of the European Union in the same way as they can use their vote to change their National Government.

This situation must be altered so that citizens will, in future, feel that they are the ones who really run the European Union. Fine Gael has a proposal that would bring this change about.

Europe’s triangle of institutions – the Commission, the Parliament and the Council of Ministers – are, of course, somewhat different from the institutions that run an individual country. But Fine Gael believes that the time has come to allow all the people of Europe to vote, directly and together, to choose the head of one of Europe’s main institutions. Such an election would be a truly “European” election, where all Europeans would be making the same choice on the same day. In that way, people would come to feel that their vote really counts in the European Union. They would feel part of the Union.

Fine Gael, therefore, proposes that the President of the European Commission be elected directly by all the people of Europe in a single ballot on a "one person, one vote" basis.

Fine Gael accepts, however, that the remainder of the Commission members would continue to be appointed on the present basis where every country, large and small, would have an equal right to a Commissioner. We also accept that the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament would also retain their existing powers.

But the direct election of the President of the Commission by all the people of Europe would give them a real say in the direction the Union would take. A directly elected President of the Commission would also have the added moral authority of a mandate from all the people, even though he/she would be working with all the other institutions and the Member States within a balanced framework.

To be a candidate for election as President of the Commission, a person would have to be nominated by a minimum number of MEPs and a minimum number of members of different national parliaments. A possible formula could be nomination by 15% of MEPs and 15% of members of at least eight national parliaments.

This Fine Gael proposal would make everyone feel they were really part of the European project, and would help people to identify much more closely with the European Union.

SECURITY IN A CHANGING EUROPE – TACKLING TERRORISM AND TRAFFICKING

The growth of European partnership and co-operation, arising from the conflicts of the 20th century, has offered EU citizens a high degree of peace, stability and security.

However, in the wake of the terrorist atrocity in Madrid it is apparent that the European Union must provide for greater common action to combat serious threats to future security.
• Fine Gael supports the expansion of Europol to prevent and combat serious crimes with an international dimension;
• Fine Gael believes that Eurojust, the European Union body established in 2002 to assist in the effectiveness of the investigation and prosecution of serious cross-border crime, should be developed to enhance crosscommunity co-operation and communication in the fight against crime;
• Fine Gael believes that measures against serious crimes such as the trading in enslaved women, drug trafficking, Internet related crime, money laundering and acts of racism should be harmonised throughout the European Union in all national legal systems to establish comparable EU standards;
• Fine Gael supports the creation of a European Public Prosecutor;
• Fine Gael supports the provisions of the draft European Constitution that would allow for majority voting on a number of cross-border criminal issues. This is necessary to ensure that minimum standards are attained, not only to ensure that there are no “safe havens” in Europe for particular types of crime, but also to guarantee minimum rights to defendants throughout Europe.

EU & NORTH AMERICAN RELATIONS

The enlarged EU, accounting for a quarter of the world’s GNP and more than 450 million people, will be a Union of weight, of wealth and of influence. However, at this time of European change and transformation it is important that we do not allow important relationships with States outside the EU to become marginalised.

In particular, Europe and North America have a shared history and experience, and Europe’s relationship with the United States of America (US) and Canada should not be neglected in the future.

The deep historical links between Europe and North America are underlined by the importance of present day EU/US bilateral economic relations. The EU and the US are each other’s single largest trading partner and each other’s most important source and destination for foreign direct investment (FDI). In 2002 alone, two way cross-border trade in goods and services between the EU and the US amounted to more than €650 billion. Transatlantic trade represents 39% of EU and 35% of US total cross-border trade in services.

However, transatlantic tensions have increased, and the EU/US relationship has been subject to considerable stresses. The conflict in Iraq has been the source of the greatest transatlantic disagreement of recent times. At a time when transatlantic disagreements are more common and the EU becomes larger and more independent, it would be all too easy to marginalise our relationship with the United States and Canada.

Fine Gael believes that this would be a deeply retrograde step. For that reason, and in order to reaffirm the importance of transatlantic dialogue, Fine Gael is proposing the establishment of a Foundation for Transatlantic Co-operation.

The incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as an integral part of the draft Constitutional Treaty, is a major step forward. This brings human values right to the heart of the EU.

Using Shannon as a base for its development, this foundation would have the potential to encourage transatlantic dialogue, and to harness existing European and North American co-operation and goodwill.

There is too much at stake, not only in terms of trade but also common history, experience and culture, to allow the transatlantic relationship to decline. The improved flow of information, and the opportunity for broad dialogue between European and North American leaders that would be a key part of our plans for the foundation, would enhance understanding and co-operation between both trading partners, uniting us in our common task of building a prosperous future for our peoples in the 21st century.

Fine Gael’s Foundation for Transatlantic Co-operation would have four key responsibilities:
• The Foundation would seek to promote understanding and co-operation between the continents by fostering political, cultural, business, trade union, religious and other links. The Foundation would be a centre of excellence that would promote common interests to the benefit of both Europe and North America;
• The Foundation would promote the exchange of ideas and knowledge, and provide the ways and means for greater co-operation based on democracy and the principles of international law;
• The Foundation would provide opportunities for the exchange of views between political, business, trade union and other leaders, in confidence where necessary, so as to create greater knowledge and understanding;
• The Foundation would carry out research on significant issues of concern to both continents. To assist in this objective, the Foundation would set up expert study groups made up of personnel from both continents to research agreed topics and to exchange views on these for publication. The University of Limerick, located close to Shannon Airport and offering postgraduate courses in European Integration and International Studies, could play a part in undertaking or facilitating this research.

COMMON EUROPEAN DEFENCE AND SECURITY

Fine Gael believes that there is nothing inherently moral in adopting a neutral stance on every issue, irrespective of the circumstances of each situation. Fine Gael also believes that the first duty of Government is to provide for the security of its people. This is a responsibility that is being neglected.

That is why we want Ireland to help design a common EU security and defence agreement, and to do it now while the opportunity arises. We want Ireland to get involved in the construction of such an agreement at an early stage so that we can join on our terms. Ireland should not only be part of the EU security and defence architecture, we should be one of the architects helping to design these systems to meet our needs, and our view of Europe’s needs.

In our ever-closer European Union, Ireland should play an active role in the emerging common defence and security arrangements. This is the best way to secure the safety of our people at home and abroad, and to fulfil our responsibilities to our EU neighbours and friends. Fine Gael believes that Ireland’s involvement in any future EU common security and defence system should be guided by five key commitments:
• The commitment to adhere to the fundamental principles of the United Nations (UN);
• The commitment to the pursuit of universal nuclear and biological disarmament, and a promise never to use either type of weapon;
• The commitment to mutual defence with our EU neighbours, but with specific provisions that would allow Ireland decide whether to get involved in any conflict on a ‘case by case’ basis. If we are not at the negotiations now, then we cannot make sure that this is adopted as a rule of any further defence arrangement;
• The commitment to providing peacekeeping and peacemaking operations;
• The commitment to respect the right of other EU States to enter other military alliances.

We cannot simply sit back and do nothing. If Ireland does not contribute to the debate on a common EU security and defence policy then we cannot complain when a policy is unveiled that addresses the concerns and aspirations of other States, but not of Ireland.

Whether we like it or not, the reality is that European defence co-operation is up for discussion and there is a clear momentum towards a common arrangement. It is up to us to get involved in the discussion now. Otherwise, a common position will be agreed, and Ireland will face a ‘take it or leave it’ decision.

Doing nothing is the best way of ensuring that the end of Irish neutrality will come about on the least favourable terms for Ireland and with the rules written by others. The Fine Gael document Beyond Neutrality outlines in full detail our position on the issue of common European Union defence and security.

IRELAND - INTERNATIONAL PEACEKEEPERS AND THE ‘TRIPLE LOCK’

Ireland’s Defence Forces have a long and proud tradition as peacekeepers in service with the United Nations. However, before a contingent of the Defence Forces may be deployed, the peacekeeping operation must be specifically endorsed by a UN resolution, as well as being approved by Dáil Eireann and agreed within the Government. This is referred to as the ‘triple lock’.

Fine Gael believes that the current ‘triple lock’ system is excessively restrictive. For example, the Defence Forces could not take part in an EU peacekeeping force sent to Macedonia (FYROM), even though this force replaced NATO forces in the region and had both EU and UN support, though not a formal UN resolution.

A formal UN resolution on the matter was vetoed by China because Macedonia recognised Taiwan. This has resulted in Ireland being unable to participate in the EU backed mission that was requested by the President of Macedonia. A total of 13 EU countries and 14 non-EU countries are working together in Macedonia, but Ireland is excluded because we have failed to modernise our domestic legislation.

Fine Gael believes that Ireland’s Defence Forces should be allowed to take part in peacekeeping missions that are in keeping with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations but which may not have the formal sanction of a UN resolution. This is provided for by the Charter of the United Nations itself.

In October 2003, Fine Gael published the International Peace Missions Deployment Bill to enable the Defence Forces to participate in peace missions that are in keeping with the Purposes and Principles of the UN Charter, once this is approved, on a case-by-case basis, by Dail Eireann. Fine Gael believes that this would allow for a more rational participation of Irish forces in peacekeeping activities.

Ireland’s Defence Forces should continue to be part of International UN Forces, but should also participate in other peace missions that are in keeping with the Purposes and Principles of the UN Charter where the representatives of the people in Dail Eireann so decide. No foreign Government should have a veto over our Defence Forces, as is the case at present.

The Government does not want to be confronted with a national debate on these issues and it is afraid to bring forward proposals to amend this legislation. The result is that our Defence Forces can be deployed in Liberia but not in a neighbouring State to the European Union where conditions are considerably safer. This is wrong, and should be changed.

THE RAPID REACTION FORCE

Fine Gael strongly supports the continued commitment of troops by Ireland to the Rapid Reaction Force (RRF), established during the Helsinki Summit in 1999. This force is mandated to undertake humanitarian and crisis management tasks, and Ireland has a significant and important role to play in this regard.

Kofi Annan, United Nations Secretary General, has called for conflict prevention to be the cornerstone of collective security in the 21st century. This requires us to actively focus on the root causes of conflict, such as poverty, ethnic tensions, and inequality.

In addition to tackling the root causes of conflict, we also need an effective instrument that can protect people in crisis situations. Through the RRF, we have the capability to give assistance to those whose lives are threatened by war, and can also respond in a coherent and speedy manner to UN calls for peacekeeping forces.

5 million people died from war-related causes in the 1990s. On the passing of the tenth anniversary of genocide in Rwanda it is timely to reassess our international responsibilities, and the appalling consequences when we fail to meet them.

Fine Gael, in supporting Ireland’s involvement in the RRF, also calls for the reform of the ‘triple lock’.

THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

The International Criminal Court (ICC) was established by the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court on 17 July 1998.

This is the first ever permanent, treaty-based, international criminal court established to promote the rule of law and ensure that the gravest international crimes do not go unpunished.

Ireland became a State Party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court on April 11, 2002, and today 24 of 25 European Union Member States are signatories to the Statute.

However, the United States of America is unwilling to join the vast majority of European countries, Canada, 22 African countries, the 11 countries from Asia, and the 18 from Latin America and the Caribbean who have to-date recognised the role of the International Criminal Court.

Fine Gael believes in the the primacy of the International Criminal Court in investigating serious crimes of an international nature. At the highest level, discussions between the EU and the US need to be intensified to ensure that the International Criminal Court is not simply a ‘toothless tiger’, but has the support of all States, including the US.

Ireland’s membership of the EU has helped us to make progress in tackling the endemic inequalities that exist in our society. The principle that we are all equal has been advanced.

OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT AID

Fine Gael supports the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. These goals commit the international community to an expanded vision of development, one that vigorously promotes human development as the key to sustaining social and economic progress in all countries and recognizes the importance of creating a global partnership for development.

The European Union must strive to work towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, which aim to:
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger;
2. Achieve universal primary education;
3. Promote gender equality and empower women;
4. Reduce child mortality;
5. Improve maternal health;
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases;
7. Ensure environmental sustainability;
8. Develop a global partnership for development.

In September 2000 the Taoiseach announced that Ireland would meet the UN target for overseas aid spending by 2007. This committed Ireland to devoting 0.7% of our GNP to development aid by that date. The Taoiseach and his Government got plenty of international recognition for this, and yet our contribution to overseas aid has stalled at 0.41%, making the achievement of this aim more and more unlikely.

Aid is of critical importance to the developing world. In the 1990s the number of children who died from diarrhoea exceeded the number of people killed in armed conflict since the Second World War. Today just one in five children in sub-Saharan Africa finish primary school, whilst a pregnant woman is 100 times more likely to die in pregnancy and childbirth in sub-Saharan Africa than in Ireland.

The European Union Development Committee needs new powers to push this matter to the forefront of the EU agenda. Additionally, each European Union Presidency should assess the progress being made by every Member State towards the achievement of measurable objectives such as the allocation of 0.7% of GNP as development aid by 2007.

ENLARGEMENT OF THE EUROPEAN UNION

Fine Gael is committed to the process of EU enlargement. In addition to the new States that acceded to the Union in May 2004, Fine Gael also believes that the ongoing negotiations to further enlarge the EU are of critical importance to both the EU and these potential Member States.

The substantial enlargement of the European Union offers Ireland and all other EU Member States considerable opportunities. The economic prosperity and stability of the EU can only be maintained if such conditions extend throughout Europe.

Ireland has benefited hugely from membership of the European Union, economically, socially and politically. In economic terms, Ireland’s membership of a common market for our goods and services has been critical in our recent successes.

In 2003, Ireland's exports of goods and services amounted to more than €109 billion. The EU single market has allowed our export trade to grow and to diversify, and has weakened the traditional over-dependence upon a small number of markets which so hampered growth in the past.

For example, exports to the EU from January to October 2003 accounted for 60% of total exports. Great Britain and Northern Ireland were the destination for 18% of Ireland’s exports, other EU States received 42%, USA and Canada received 22%, and the rest of the world received 18% of Ireland’s exports.

The enlargement of the European Union enlarges the single market area. As a nation heavily reliant upon export markets, this is good news for Ireland in particular.

Fine Gael supports the ongoing negotiations with countries seeking to join the European Union. The future membership of these countries of our European partnership will be good for the EU, good for the applicant countries, and good for Ireland.

CONTINUING THE BENEFITS TO THE EUROPEAN CITIZEN

Already, the citizens of Ireland derive considerable benefit from our membership of the EU:
• Citizens of Ireland have benefited not only from the freedom to travel, work, reside and use a single currency throughout the EU, but also from the recognition of their qualifications in other Member States;
• As a State, Ireland exports more than 90% of what we produce. Our membership of such a large common market area, which we have the freedom to sell into on a level playing field with all Member States, has allowed Ireland to become economically transformed in recent decades;
• Ireland's membership of the EU has helped us to make progress in tackling the endemic inequalities that exist in our society. The principle that we are all equal has been advanced. Furthermore, the EU continues to bring forward equality directives designed to combat discrimination;
• Ireland's membership of the EU has helped us to realise that our environment must be protected. Economic development must no longer equate with environmental destruction;
• Ireland's membership of the EU has been central to our economic success. Substantial Structural and Cohesion Funds contributed to economic growth, helping to finance investment in our infrastructure, education and training and productive sectors. Moreover, EU reforms and deregulation have transformed the marketplace, helping us grow our economy and the value of our exports.

Fine Gael wants to add full freedom of movement to the list of benefits already enjoyed by Irish citizens within the EU.

It is regrettable that Irish citizens travelling within the European Union are still required to show their passport. When in Government, Fine Gael negotiated an opt-in clause with regard to the Schengen Agreement, but it is not possible to exercise this clause without losing our Common Travel Area with the United Kingdom whilst that country remains outside Schengen.

Fine Gael believes that Irish citizens should be able to travel within the broader European Union on a document of lesser standing than a passport, a driving licence for example, whilst awaiting the full adoption of the Schengen Agreement by the United Kingdom. Fine Gael will continue to try to bring an end to passport use within the EU for EU citizens.

IMMIGRATION INTO THE EUROPEAN UNION

Immigration is a fact of modern European life, and is a necessary and welcome part of the fabric of the European Union.

Economic and demographic factors have made immigration an integral part of the EU’s future development, and immigration is necessary if the EU economy is to be sustained. This is due to the projected fall in the EU workingage population over the next 20 years, which could result in a sharp decline in overall employment and a real drop in EU living standards and growth.

Immigration is, therefore, not only desirable but is also necessary. In a European context, action is needed in three key areas:
• Integration policy should be holistic, addressing legal, economic, social, cultural and religious issues as well as civic participation and knowledge of political rights and duties;
• Illegal immigration should be addressed at EU level through increased border control and surveillance, cooperation with countries of origin, a co-ordinated visa policy, along with information sharing and police cooperation to stamp out the appalling practise of human trafficking;
• The EU should expand and co-ordinate its actions to address asylum applications, with comprehensive EUwide minimum standards of treatment for asylum applicants.

Fine Gael will publish a separate policy document concerning the development of an EU-wide approach to immigration.

NORTHERN IRELAND

Enhanced co-operation at EU level in tackling problems that affect the island of Ireland can only be of benefit to the people of the island as a whole and should be strongly supported.

Fine Gael also wishes to build strong cross-border and cross-community trading and cultural links, which we believe would be of benefit to both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.

Fine Gael is committed to peace and reconciliation, and we believe that this can be made a reality through the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. For six years, we have strongly supported and defended the Good Friday Agreement. The principles underpinning it are those that Fine Gael has promoted for many years: reconciliation, power sharing and the absolute rejection of violence as a means of achieving political ends.

Throughout the EU, two thirds of private sector jobs are in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, and SMEs create the bulk of all new jobs. The role of the entrepreneur is vital to the future health of the European economy.

THE EUROPEAN ECONOMY – DYNAMIC AND COMPETITIVE

Fine Gael believes that our membership of the European Union offers tremendous advantages to Ireland and has been a major reason for our recent economic growth.

Since joining this European partnership, Ireland has finally begun to reach its economic potential. We must ensure that we continue to reap the benefits of EU membership, in conjunction with promoting stability and success throughout the EU as a whole.

However, although Ireland has been a strong economic player in recent years we are now starting to slide in terms of our competitiveness, which should be of concern to us all.

With the addition of ten new Member States to the Union, most of whom face economic hurdles more difficult than the ones we face, Ireland must ensure that the economic framework within Europe meets the needs of Ireland, of the existing Member States and the new Member States. To this end, Fine Gael commits itself in the next session of the European Parliament to:
• Reform the Stability and Growth Pact to allow infrastructural investment within a prudent fiscal framework;
• Reiterate our opposition to any attempt to dilute the unanimity requirement for tax harmonization.

Fine Gael will also fight for the best possible deal for Ireland with regard to post-2006 funding that will shape the Union for the rest of the decade.

SUPPORTING BUSINESS

Businesses, especially new start-ups, need support in their early days. Excessive administrative requirements can overburden new companies, and distract their attention from growing their customer base. At European level, Fine Gael believes that:
• All new legislation should be assessed in terms of its cost to companies and employment;
• ‘Red tape’ should be minimised;
• A new EU patent should be developed to protect the intellectual property of European companies.

Throughout the EU, two-thirds of private sector jobs are in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, and SMEs create the bulk of all new jobs. The role of the entrepreneur, that person who takes the risk and sets up a business, is vital to the future health of the European economy.

Entrepreneurial talent and motivation are the lifeblood of our future economic success, and should be fostered in every Member State.

CONSUMER PROTECTION

The European Union has enacted a wide range of consumer protection legislation.

However, it is clear that consumers continue to live in rip-off Ireland. Often, consumers do not get a good deal, and they do not yet have sufficient protection against fraudulent or negligent suppliers of goods and services.

And with the increased use of the Internet by companies and individuals for sourcing goods and services, the potential for rip-offs has increased considerably.

In tandem with significantly improved access to consumer protection services at home, like the establishment of a Consumer Rights Enforcer recently suggested by Fine Gael, we believe that the role of the EU in consumer protection must be enhanced considerably:
• A high standard of common rules and practices in the area of consumer protection should be established throughout the EU;
• The distribution of accessible and relevant consumer information must be guaranteed to enable consumers to make informed choices;
• When things go wrong, consumers need a basic standard of legal rights, regardless of what EU State they are based in, that they can understand and that they can act upon;
• Given the increasing number of cross-border consumer transactions within the EU, consumers need access to EU systems of arbitration and mediation that will apply throughout the Union.

TACKLING THE INSURANCE RIP-OFF

Fine Gael believes the European Union offers Irish consumers the very real opportunity to get the best deal they can in a range of goods and services. Further, Irish entrepreneurs are more and more looking to an expanded European market to grow their business.

But both these groups face one huge obstacle to a real, thriving free market - the lack of a Single European Insurance Market.

The cost of insurance to Irish consumers has more than trebled in the last three years. Young motorists are being driven off the road. Small businesses are threatened with closure because of soaring public liability insurance costs.

Fine Gael MEPs will spare no energy in pushing for the creation of one insurance market for all of Europe, thus fostering competition and driving insurance costs down.

EDUCATION

Receiving a good education is the best possible start in life, and gives people the greatest chance of personal fulfilment and employment as adults.

In March 2000, the European Council in Lisbon set out a ten-year strategy to make the EU the world's most dynamic and competitive economy. The Lisbon Strategy aims to drive job creation alongside social and environmental policies that ensure sustainable development and social inclusion.

However, the progress towards reaching this objective has been slow, and Ireland’s Presidency of the European Union has failed to kick-start the Lisbon Strategy. This strategy could offer the people of Europe a real and tangible improvement in their quality of life, but needs strong cross-Governmental support to become a reality.

If the EU is to be serious about achieving the targets set at Lisbon, then we need action on key issues affecting education.
• A public education system of the highest quality must be available to all EU citizens, whilst also respecting the existence of private education which provides for greater choice;
• Multilingualism must be promoted, especially at an early age, and right throughout the educational process;
• The promotion of new technologies in training and educational programmes should be supported;
• To combat educational disadvantage an EU wide task force on early school leaving should be established to promote the achievement of the highest possible school retention rates in each EU Member State. This task force could provide information to all Member States on specific initiatives that have proved successful in encouraging school retention;
• European education programmes must be developed to remove access obstacles and encourage student and teacher mobility. Furthermore, university courses and apprenticeships should incorporate study, travel, training or employment in other EU countries as part of an EU-wide drive to encourage further education and life long learning.

Education must be open and accessible to all EU citizens. Participation in education must stimulate people to take an active part in society, and further their social and personal growth. By developing individuals we will strengthen society as a whole.

MAKING CHILD SAFETY A PRIORITY

Ireland lags behind other EU Member States in our totally inadequate vetting procedures for people who, through employment or volunteer positions, have substantial unsupervised access to children and vulnerable adults.

Fine Gael has led the debate at home on the type of vetting procedures that we think should be put in place for teachers and other staff at schools, for staff at Health Boards, and for staff and volunteers at charitable, sporting and youth organisations.

However, we also believe that the European Union should take an active role in promoting basic vetting standards and procedures across all Member States. We need to ensure that certain EU Member States do not provide employment havens for potential abusers due to inadequate vetting procedures, such as those that exist in Ireland.

SUPPORTING YOUTH

15% of EU citizens under the age of 25 have neither a job nor are in full time study. This high level of youth unemployment indicates a considerable failing on the part of the EU and individual Member States. Fine Gael supports specific measures that would improve the prospects for youth employment. EU policies should promote entrepreneurial spirit amongst young people and encourage initiative and creativity.

Furthermore, young people’s mobility and employability should be supported through a flexible and efficient system of degree recognition throughout Europe.

We are committed to ensuring that the family farm is a viable option for those who wish to remain on the land. We are determined that all policy decisions must reflect and facilitate this aim.

A HEALTHY EUROPE

In 2001 there were 62 million people aged 65 and over in the EU, compared with 34 million in 1960. As the age profile of the EU changes, we must plan ahead now to meet the future health needs of the European citizen.

This presents us all with a considerable challenge. Already, it is estimated that there may be up to 100 million people across Europe living with chronic pain as a result of musculoskeletal conditions such as arthritis. As the EU ages, arthritis and other rheumatic complaints are likely to present increasing challenges to the provision of effective healthcare.

Fine Gael supports action across all EU Member States to raise awareness of medical conditions that particularly affect older people, with a view to promoting an active and independent old age.

Fine Gael also supports the creation of a common European health budget to combat illnesses and diseases, such as obesity, diabetes, Alzheimer's, Aids and cancer, that broadly speaking affect the citizens of all Member States equally.

Fine Gael believes that the European Union must mobilise global action and resources for health research to halt the spread of diseases like malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS that increasingly threaten all the people of the world. A European Union of 25 Member States has the political weight and influence to bring about decisive global action in these important areas. Additionally, the diseases that principally affect the developing world, such as pneumonia, diarrhoea, tuberculosis and malaria, get only a tiny fraction of the current drug research budgets. A breakthrough in the treatment of these diseases could save millions of lives.

Ireland has been successful in targeting some development aid in the fight against AIDS. However, much more needs to be done. Fine Gael believes that the EU must take the lead in research towards the development of easily administered and inexpensive AIDS treatments, which would be of particular assistance in the fight against AIDS in the developing world. There is no commercial incentive for the major pharmaceutical companies to develop this vaccine so the European Union should step in.

Ireland has the highest incidence of asthma in Europe and the 4th highest in the world. It directly affects 1 in 7 children and 1 in 20 adults. Fine Gael will promote at EU level support for research into the growing incidence of asthma in both adults and children.

In Ireland alone there are up to 7,000 asthma related hospital admissions a year and A&E visits are four times this figure. Between 80 and 100 people die in Ireland each year from asthma, and 30% of them are under 40 years of age. The more information people have about their condition and the more they understand it, the better they will be able to control their asthma, with less need for costly hospital admissions, and missed school and work days.

Fine Gael will support Europe-wide information initiatives to empower asthma sufferers so that their condition is not a barrier to their participation in sport and does not affect their education, work, home and social life.

Fine Gael also believes that people need greater information about the effects of both the prescription and nonprescription drugs that they take. The EU should establish a public information office that could answer general queries on the effects and uses of medications, in a way that does not prejudice the importance of the doctor / patient relationship.

ENSURING RIGHTS FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES

Fine Gael ensured through the Reflection Group and the Amsterdam Treaty process that the needs of people with disabilities were specifically provided for. We must now build on that Treaty provision by ensuring that legislation, directives and regulations are introduced to meet the needs and concerns of disabled persons throughout the EU. This will be a priority for our MEP's as well as all Fine Gael Ministers and TD's, Senators and Councillors.

Fine Gael also supports and endorses, nationally and at EU level, the drafting of a comprehensive UN Convention to Promote and Protect the Rights and Dignity of People with Disabilities. We will support and promote the active participation of people with disabilities in the national and EU delegation to the convention process. We will assist and facilitate the wider dissemination of information on the process and the draft convention to people in Ireland, particularly those whose rights would be protected in such a convention.

Fine Gael also supports the enactment of comprehensive disability legislation in Ireland to vindicate the rights of people with a disability.

AGRICULTURE AND FOOD

Fine Gael recognises that the Mid-Term Review of CAP will bring significant changes to Irish agriculture. However, we are committed to ensuring that the family farm remains a viable option for those who wish to remain on the land. We are determined that all policy decisions, whether taken at national or EU level, must reflect and facilitate this aim.

Agricultural policy must seek to assist production and strive to develop a product which has both a competitive advantage and a market outlet. We are aware that some sectors of Irish agriculture face major changes post-CAP reform, particularly dairying, while others are almost certain to lose out, especially retired farmers and new entrants. Fine Gael is committed to finding and implementing measures to assist them.
• Live Animal Trade - Fine Gael recognises the importance of the live animal trade to the agriculture industry, and has raised its concerns with respect to the issue with the EU Commissioner. Fine Gael will press to ensure that EU proposals for reform of the live trade will include the inclusion of staging posts and that any EU proposals will not have a negative impact on the industry.
• Nitrates Directive - Fine Gael recognises the need to protect and improve our water quality. The implementation of the Nitrates Directive must be based on scientific fact so that no unnecessary burden is placed on farm practices. Fine Gael will work to ensure that adequate funding is provided for the development works required for storage and that the necessary derogations required in advance of this are obtained.
• Farm Partnerships - Fine Gael will examine all necessary regulations to ensure that farmers, who so desire, can enter into partnerships to improve efficiency without suffering any penalties. This will be encouraged in all farming sectors.
• Animal Breeding - Fine Gael will promote quality breeding in the suckler herd and will establish a programme of breeding improvement in conjunction the Irish Cattle Breeding Federation.
• Food Standards Authority - Fine Gael will extend the role and functions of the Food Safety Authority to encompass Food Standards to ensure that Irish produced foodstuffs can gain a competitive advantage by improving quality and labelling.
• Food Labelling - We will seek changes in EU Labelling Policy to ensure that the consumer knows what they are eating and to cease the practice of non-EU foodstuffs being passed off as home produce.
• Marketing - With the advent of the Single Farm Payment, Fine Gael will examine how best personnel can be redeployed within the Department of Agriculture and Food with a view to increasing resources allocated to the marketing of Irish produce throughout the European Union and farther afield.
• REPS III - Fine Gael calls for the immediate introduction of the REPS III Scheme. It must be designed to encourage the maximum number of farmers to participate in the scheme by ensuring an ease of entry through a minimum amount of paperwork and bureaucracy.
• New Entrants / Young Farmers – Fine Gael fully recognises the importance of passing on the family farm to the next generation. We will work with our European partners to develop policies to assist young farmers. In particular, we will regularly review the level and functioning of installation aid to ensure that it can adapt to meet the needs of young farmers.
• World Trade Talks - Fine Gael will ensure that Ireland pursues a tough negotiating stance at the World Trade Talks to guarantee that Irish farmers and producers can remain competitive and dynamic on the global market.

MARINE

Given the present geo-political climate and the possible threat of terrorist attacks, the EU, in recognising the vulnerability of maritime targets, should establish an EU Coastguard to provide a co-ordinated rapid response should such a maritime attack ever occur.

Such a coastguard could also vigorously police the revised Common Fisheries Policy to ensure the deal, which involves a significant loss of tonnage for Irish fishermen, is administered fairly.

An EU Coastguard could also have a vital role in combating the actions of organised criminals who exploit EU waters in the trafficking of arms, drugs and human beings.

EU Member States acting alone are under resourced and ill prepared to face the threat of maritime disaster. The traffic in EU shipping lanes is increasingly heavy and the number of collisions that have occurred in EU waters point to the need for more effective co-ordination if we are to avoid potential maritime disasters.

Fine Gael MEPs were instrumental in having a proposal on the establishment of an EU Coastguard accepted recently by the European Parliament Committee on Maritime Safety, and will continue to call vigorously for the establishment of such a service.

The enlarged EU will be Union of weight, of wealth and of influence. However, at this time of European change and transformation it is important that we do not allow relationships with States outside the EU to become marginalised.
• As an island nation, Ireland must become a leader in research on wave and tidal energy;

PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT

Pollution does not respect national boundaries. Environmental damage in one Member State affects other States around it. For this reason, Fine Gael believes that the European Union must take an increasingly active role in legislating for a cleaner environment.

Fine Gael is deeply concerned at the continued operation of the Sellafield nuclear plant and is strongly opposed to any expansion of its activities. Sellafield poses an unacceptable threat to all the people of Ireland, and particularly those on the eastern seaboard.

Fine Gael believes that the EU must be rigorous in enforcing standards on safety and security at nuclear plants including the transport of nuclear materials, storage of depleted nuclear materials, management of radioactive waste, the risk of accidents or incidents and radioactive discharges into the sea. In Ireland’s case the last issue is particularly important because of the discharges from Sellafield.

Ireland has changed immeasurably since the 1990s. However, our rapid development has not been accompanied by an emphasis on good planning. Consequently, Ireland has seen a level of environmental deterioration in recent years that must be challenged.

In terms of waste management, the prevention and minimisation of waste, and the provision of recycling facilities, requires urgent priority. Ireland lags far behind other EU Member States in the amount that we recycle. We recycle less than 8% of our household waste compared with 46% for Austria, 44% for Holland, 40% for Belgium, and 30% for Germany.

Fine Gael remains very concerned at the failure of the Government to prioritise environmental matters, and to implement key EU Directives without delay.

RENEWABLE ENERGY

Today, Ireland is the worst performer in the EU in the area of renewable energy promotion. We produce just 2% of gross electricity production from renewable energy sources, while production in Germany and Denmark averages over 20%. This has an impact upon our greenhouse gas emissions, currently running at 39% above our 1990 emissions levels, which is three times the 13% target set at Kyoto.

This Government has failed to support the development of renewable energy options, and under the Emissions Trading Directive Ireland could face fines of over €1 billion over the next ten years. Therefore, there is a compelling economic argument, as well as an environmental argument, for new and innovative policies that will massively increase Ireland’s Renewable Energy output.

As a matter of urgency, we must create a viable market place for Renewable Energy. Fine Gael believes that this can be achieved by action in key areas:
• Wind energy must be prioritised;
• Wood Biomass can be used to replace peat as a fuel source;
• Cutbacks in the forestry sector should be reversed to expand planting;
• An inter-connector to allow Ireland to become an exporter of Renewable Energy should be provided;
• Tax incentives to grow biofuels on Irish farms should be introduced;
• All local authorities must be directed to create renewable energy plans;
• A Minister for State for Energy should be appointed; and,
• The investment of €30 million, promised in the NDP to develop the National Grid to facilitate Renewable
• Energy development, must be provided.

COMMUNICATING EQUALLY

Fine Gael commits itself to the call for the revision of the Television Without Frontiers Directive to include provision for those with a sensory disability. We also call on the European Commission to formulate an Action Plan on TV access for people with disabilities as part of the Directive.

Fine Gael believes that captioning (subtitling) must become more widely available across all EU Member States to allow people who are deaf increased access to the pleasure and information available through television.

We also favour the enhanced provision of wireless broadband technologies, as they can be of particular assistance in increasing technological access to those in regional areas of the EU.

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Fine Gael will fight for the retention of Objective One Status for the Border-Midlands-West (BMW) region in the allocation of EU Cohesion funds post-2006.

Fine Gael will work to ensure that EU policies in key areas like Industrial Development, Trade and Enterprise are not at divergence with EU Regional Development policies. In the interests of balanced regional development, during the formation of new policies for the EU, their likely impact on the regions should be considered.

Fine Gael believes that EU Regional Development policies, such as Structural Funding, should aim not only to address economic and social imbalances between the regions, but also seek to enhance equal opportunities for men and women, and marginalized groups such as the elderly and the disabled within the regions.

TOURISM

Tourism is critical for Ireland’s economic success and stability. The tourism industry delivers up to €2.2 billion in tax receipts to the exchequer every year, employs 140,000 people, and accounts for 4.4% of Ireland’s GNP. The importance of the industry to Ireland’s economy is obvious, but under the current Government a lack of competitiveness coupled with rising costs and charges has put the future growth of the industry in jeopardy.

Throughout the EU, tourism accounts for 5% of employment and has a significant knock-on effect on other aspects of economic life. Tourism also has an important role in political, cultural and social integration within the EU.

Fine Gael believes that EU funding for tourism is critical in providing greater access to the regions, and in redressing imbalances in tourism growth when they arise. Ireland, as an island nation, faces particular difficulties with regard to access, and requires specific EU support to overcome geographical difficulties.

