Executive Summary
 
Building Support in Europe for Irish Reunification
 
•  The EU, and British and Irish Governments, should allow for an active role for members of the Executive in the Council of EU Ministers.
•  Development of a single EU Community Support Framework to ensure that strategic planning can take place on an all-Ireland basis and that the EU can treat Ireland as a single entity for funding purposes.
•  Exemption from state aid provisions to allow governments to make strategic investments to deal with the social, economic and structural distortions caused by partition.
•  Introduction of the Euro in the North.
•  Seek an exemption from these rules to allow for the reunification of Ireland as is currently permitted in the case of German re-unification.
•  Step up the campaign for the EU to support Irish reunification.
 
For Positive Change in the European Union
 
•  Oppose any Lisbon Treaty re-run as anti- democratic and a bad deal for Ireland.
•  Support negotiation of a new treaty for a new time, based on the recommendations made by Sinn Fein, reflecting the concerns of the Irish people.
•  Campaign for the people of the north to exercise a vote on any future Treaty.
•  Promote a real agenda for greater EU democracy.
•  Strengthening the role of regional and national parliaments and local authorities.
•  Reducing the power of the unelected and unaccountable Commission.
 
Reform of MEP parliamentary allowance system to ensure that all expenses claimed are vouched and full details are published.
•  End to the system where sitting MEPs claim oireachtas/ ministerial pensions.
 
For Sustainable Prosperity With Equality
 
•   Be the strongest advocates of Irish economic sovereignty and all-Ireland tax harmonisation.
•  Oppose market supremacy, deregulation and liberalisation and promote a new approach to economic policy which ensures that sustainable prosperity is underpinned by equality.
•  Place the ‘green economy’ at the heart of economic development and new job opportunities.
•  Encourage access to the EU funds to boost affordable, high speed broadband services in rural areas.
•  Ensure EU funds part-finance a programme of energy efficiency renovations that would provide support to our construction industry, saving jobs and creating jobs while at the same time playing a part in meeting our climate change obligations and tackling fuel poverty.
•   Strengthen SME access to and participation in public procurement specifically by adapting the size of contracts and alleviating the
administrative and financial burden in tendering and by using e-procurement.
•   Seek to safeguard the economic sectors most at risk from globalisation, and in particular agriculture.
•  Promote fair trade rather than unrestricted free trade as the guiding principle of the EU’s economic relations with other countries.
 
For Protecting Public Services and Workers’ Rights
 
•  Oppose the liberalisation and privatisation of key public services (such as education and health) and campaign to ensure that such services remain the exclusive responsibility of Member States.
•  Fight against the relocation of businesses and jobs to lower wage economies and ensure that companies cannot relocate to other jurisdictions, within the EU, on this basis.
•  Campaign for EU support for retraining of workers affected by company closures.
•  Continue to campaign for a “Social Progress Clause” in any future EU Treaty which would guarantee that pay and employment conditions cannot be undermined by rulings of the European Court of Justice.
 
For Ending Economic Inequality and Poverty
 
•  The European Economic Recovery Plan contributes to the priority of ending poverty and inequality.
•  Comprehensive EU legislation to protect economic and social rights, and to build on progress made with regard to access to goods and services.
•  Equal access to good quality social, educational, child care and health services, and housing, transport energy and water services.
•  EU targets for ending homelessness.
•  A guaranteed minimum income in order to ensure a dignified life for everybody.
 
For Protecting Ireland’s Rural Economy and Fishing Communities
 
•  Support reforms of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) that make Irish farming and the rural economy more sustainable and prosperous.
For Protecting Public Services and Workers’ Rights
 
•  Oppose the liberalisation and privatisation of key public services (such as education and health) and campaign to ensure that such services remain the exclusive responsibility of Member States.
•  Fight against the relocation of businesses and jobs to lower wage economies and ensure that companies cannot relocate to other jurisdictions, within the EU, on this basis.
•  Campaign for EU support for retraining of workers affected by company closures.
•  Continue to campaign for a “Social Progress Clause” in any future EU Treaty which would guarantee that pay and employment conditions cannot be undermined by rulings of the European Court of Justice.
 
For Ending Economic Inequality and Poverty
 
•  The European Economic Recovery Plan contributes to the priority of ending poverty and inequality.
•  Comprehensive EU legislation to protect economic and social rights, and to build on progress made with regard to access to goods and services.
•  Equal access to good quality social, educational, child care and health services, and housing, transport energy and water services.
•  EU targets for ending homelessness.
•  A guaranteed minimum income in order to ensure a dignified life for everybody.
 
For Protecting Ireland’s Rural Economy and Fishing Communities
 
•  Support reforms of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) that make Irish farming and the rural economy more sustainable and prosperous.
For Safe Renewable Energy and Against Nuclear Power
 
•  Support moves to increase the output of renewable energy across Ireland, including biofuels where these are environmentally and socially sustainable.
•  Campaign for an all-Ireland energy network that is self-sufficient and sustainable.
•  Unequivocally reject the use and promotion of nuclear energy in Ireland and across Europe and continue to campaign for the closure of Sellafield.
•  Work to end EU subsidies from export credit agencies and public investment banks for nuclear projects.
 
For Equality, Human Rights and Civil Liberties
 
•  Promote the right to participate to the EU decision-making process and campaign for full and equal accessibility of the EU institutions and its facilities.
•  Work to ensure that older people can move freely within the EU without losing their pension rights.
•  Support the European Women’s Lobby ‘50/50 Campaign’, demanding equal gender representation in all EU institutions.
•  Support the equal rights of LGBT citizens, including the rights to freedom of movement and family reunification through partnership recognition, an inclusive definition of the family in EU law and policy, and explicit recognition of transgender people’s equal rights.
•  Support the right of all persons seeking protection to be treated according to the same highest standards across all Member States.
•  Work to end the restriction of asylum seekers’ and refugees’ access to employment.
•  Support EU-level and international cooperation in criminal justice matters where this clearly serves the public interest.
 
•  Not agree to cede national sovereignty over or democratic oversight of, and oppose any moves towards establishing exclusive EU competence over, any area of justice.
 
For the Language Rights of Irish Speakers
 
•  Continue to use Irish in our work and push the EU bodies to respect the rights of Irish speakers.
•  Pressure the Irish Government to meet its commitments in providing an adequate number of Irish interpreters and translators.
•  Encourage the Irish Government to develop Irish- language courses in Gaeltacht areas specifically targeted at interpreters and translators from different language backgrounds.
 
For Irish Neutrality and Global Social Justice
 
•  Oppose the drive to integrate foreign and defence policy among EU Member States and to subordinate this policy to NATO, and campaign
for the restoration of an independent Irish foreign policy.
•  Campaign for an EU Global Social Justice Agenda with an emphasis on the Millennium Development Goals, Trade Justice, and UN reform.
•  Support UN-led conflict prevention, dispute mediation, peace negotiation, peace enforcement and peacekeeping operations, elections or other human rights monitoring, and post-conflict capacity building.
•  Campaign for legally-binding provisions to ensure that EU companies operating outside the EU do not violate human rights or undermine environmental sustainability.
•  Continue to use the European Parliament as a forum to voice opposition to the occupation of the Palestinian Territories by Israel and to call for the suspension of EU preferential trade with Israel until such time as that state fully complies with international law.  

1. Sinn Féin: A Positive Voice in Europe A Voice for Change in Europe Your Voice in Europe

Sinn Féin wants Ireland to play a central role in shaping the future direction of the European Union. Our two MEPs, Bairbre de Brún and Mary Lou McDonald, since their election in 2004 have been a positive and constructive voice in the European Parliament.

Sinn Fein’s approach to the EU is guided by a simple principle. We actively support proposals and measures that are in the interests of Ireland and the EU as a whole and campaign to change those that are not.

In the European Parliament Sinn Féin has supported measures that:

protect workers rights and public services promote environmental protection and sustainability promote balanced regional development protect and promote the rural economy provide greater democracy and accountability in the EU institutions protect Irish neutrality and oppose increased militarisation of the EU promote greater human rights protection for all promote fair trade and greater equality for the developing world

The record of our MEPs speaks for itself. They have worked with others to advance the interests of Ireland and the European Union and to protect the rights and entitlements of ordinary people in Ireland, across Europe and the wider world.

Sinn Féin has put the interests of Ireland first in Europe – our people, our rural communities, our natural environment and our future prosperity.

Sinn Féin has led the way in developing a new working relationship with the EU that will deliver real results. We have provided real leadership in demanding that Ireland – North and South – is not squeezed out of the decision making process. Sinn Féin is a positive voice in Europe. We are a voice for change in Europe. We are your voice in Europe.

Sinn Féin’s Record in the European Parliament

Since their election to the European Parliament in 2004 Bairbre de Brún and Mary Lou Mac Donald have:

Brought the case for a United Ireland to MEPs and other decision-makers from all over Europe, and promoted practical measures to strengthen all-Ireland working to benefit all the people of Ireland.

Worked with our Ministers in the Executive to help secure the €333 million PEACE programme including €225 million from Europe.

Secured overwhelming backing for the de Brún Report on the PEACE programme, which recognises that peace building and reconciliation is a long-term process requiring ongoing support for grass roots projects and projects targetted at areas of greatest disadvantage.

Worked with Irish language groups to secure the status of official and working language of the European Union for Irish.

Raised issues of conflict resolution, and the possible lessons of the Irish peace process for resolving conflicts in other countries inside and outside the EU.

Facilitated the engagement of trade unionists, community groups, collusion victims and others with the EU institutions.

Brought the workings of the EU to local people through direct engagement with local businesses, trade unions, community organisations, environmental groups, NGOs and rural communities.

Initiated and secured overwhelming support for a Declaration calling for action by the EU and member states to end street homelessness by 2015.

Worked to maximise the potential of the EU Economic Recovery Plan to tackle the economic crisis and supported measures to help our small businesses.

Secured a visit to the North West of the influential Regional Development Committee to promote fair regional development.

Secured recognition of the issue of corporate manslaughter in a report on Corporate Social Responsibility.

Secured overwhelming support for the McDonald Report and subsequent resolution on the ILO Maritime Labour Convention to create an international framework to limit workers’ rights abuses in the maritime sector.

Successfully campaigned against the proposed Port Services Directive which would have cost jobs and driven down pay and conditions in ports across the EU.

Campaigned for workers’ rights and against proposals to increase working time and to end opt-outs and abuses of the Working Time Directive.

Campaigned against the liberalisation of public services, particularly through the Services Directive, the proposed Directive on cross-border health care and the Directive on Postal Services. Resisted imports of Brazilian beef over traceability concerns.

Secured further support for farmers in meeting the requirements of the Nitrates Directive, and pushed for reduced bureaucracy.

Briefed farmers and rural communities on EU developments and facilitated their engagement with Europe.

Promoted renewable energy and energy efficiency as a way of boosting the local economy and tackling climate change and fuel poverty.

Actively promoted progressive solutions to climate change through Bairbre de Brún’s membership of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and amended EU legislation to promote recycling.

Campaigned for a Directive on equal treatment, irrespective of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation, to complement existing Directives against discrimination on the grounds of gender or race.

Helped secure one million signatures across the EU calling for improved rights for people with disabilities.

2. Building Support in Europe for Irish Re-unification

The border in Ireland is one of the least open in the EU when it comes to cross-border social and economic development. The Good Friday Agreement provides a road-map for the intensification of cross-border cooperation on a range of issues. Sinn Féin believes that the only way to truly transform the economy in Ireland is through an island-wide strategy for development and regeneration. There are a number of ways in which the EU can support such developments.

Sinn Féin launched a document on EU support for Irish reunification in 2006, outlining how the EU could help overcome the legacy of partition and support the reunification of Ireland. Among the proposals are:

The EU should encourage the Irish Government to allow for the participation of elected representatives from all over Ireland in the Houses of the Oireachtas.

The EU, and British and Irish Governments, should allow for an active role for members of the Executive in the Council of EU Ministers.

Development of a single National Reform Programme on economic and social development, to include all-Ireland harmonisation of taxes and of regulation on employment, social cohesion and the environment.

Development of a single EU Community Support Framework to ensure that strategic planning can take place on an all-Ireland basis and that the EU can treat Ireland as a single entity for funding purposes. Provision for the Assembly to democratically “opt-in” to EU Directives where the British Government has opted-out in order to ensure that the whole island is operating within the same social and economic framework.

Exemption from state aid provisions to allow governments to make strategic investments to deal with the social, economic and structural distortions caused by partition. Introduction of the Euro in the North.

Sinn Fein MEPs will continue to raise these issues and campaign for the EU to support Irish reunification.

Using EU Structural Funds to Build National Reconciliation and Regional Equality

The EU’s structural funds have benefited Ireland, North and South. Cohesion policy is a success of the European Union. It is also one of the most visible EU policies for people of the Members States.

Newer Member States deserve the same chances that Ireland got through the structural funds. Sinn Féin in Europe has been vocal in our support for a strong, well-financed EU structural funds programme based on solidarity between regions.

The Sinn Féin team in Europe has prioritised Ireland’s regions in our work. The North-West of our country has lost out immeasurably because of partition. Our work in the European Parliament has empowered people from this region and from across Ireland to demand that they and their regions are treated on the basis of equality.

Sinn Féin played an important role in the lobbying that brought about the PEACE III programme. In a report overwhelmingly backed by MEPs in 2008 we highlighted the role of the PEACE programme to aid the process of national reconciliation through funding projects which genuinely redress the injustices of the past and bring communities together.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Fight for Ireland’s regions and for an allIreland dynamic to structural fund spending. Work with the Task Force set-up by the European Commission to make sure we maximise the efficiency of our structural fund receipts.

Work to have sustainable development and social inclusion at the heart of EU funding regulations.

3. For Positive Change in the European Union

In 2008 almost one million voters in the South of Ireland voted against the Lisbon Treaty. It was the same decision as that taken by two of the founding members of the European Union, France and the Netherlands, who two years earlier rejected the same package of proposals. In the North citizens were denied the right to vote on the issue by the British Government.

Like the people of France and the Netherlands, voters in Ireland were concerned with issues of democracy, public services, workers rights, environmental protection, militarisation, and trade.

The Irish people who had an opportunity to vote were – like the people of France and the Netherlands – saying yes to a more democratic, a more equitable and a more peaceful European Union.

Sinn Féin believes that the EU needs reform. Immediately after the defeat of the Lisbon Treaty in 2008 we presented detailed proposals to the Irish Government on what we believed would be required for the people of Ireland to support any new Treaty.

The global recession has demonstrated the failures of the economic and social policies pursued by the Irish and British Governments, and the European Union. These same economic policies are pushed even further in the Lisbon Treaty. Now more than ever it is time for a new treaty for the new times in which we find ourselves.

We need a new treaty that brings greater democracy to the EU, returning power to people and Member States. We need a treaty that sets out economic and social policies that prioritise prosperity with equality and sustainability. We need a treaty that protects Irish neutrality and that sets its face against the creeping militarisation of the EU and foreign and defence policies decided by NATO.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Oppose any Lisbon Treaty re-run as antidemocratic.

Support negotiation of a new treaty for a new time, based on the recommendations made by Sinn Fein, reflecting the concerns of the Irish people.

Campaign for the people of the North to exercise a vote on any future Treaty.

For a More Democratic EU

Sinn Féin has campaigned for greater democracy and accountability in the EU. Unfortunately, the democratic deficit remains. Decisions are made far from ordinary people, with little scrutiny, and in a way that prevents their active participation.

The gap between ordinary people and the European Commission, Council and Parliament is growing. As a result decisions taken in the EU do not reflect peoples’ real concerns or needs.

Sinn Féin MEPs will continue to promote a more democratic EU by:

Promoting a real agenda for greater EU democracy.

Strengthening the role of regional and national parliaments and local authorities. Defending the wishes of Member State citizens as democratically expressed in referenda.

Reducing the power of the unelected and unaccountable Commission.

Assessing each piece of legislation on its overall impact on Ireland.

Proposing reform of MEP parliamentary allowance system to ensure that all expenses claimed are vouched and full details are published.

Calling for an end to the system where sitting MEPs claim Oireachtas/ Ministerial pensions.

4. For Sustainable Prosperity With Equality

The scale of the economic challenge facing us in Europe and in Ireland demands a new approach to creating and sustaining jobs, protecting the rights of workers and tackling poverty. Across Europe billions are being pumped into the financial sector yet it is ordinary people who are losing their jobs and their homes.

The current EU economic policy is fundamentally flawed in that it prioritises market competition over more important economic and social goals such as full employment, social justice and environmental sustainability.

We believe the current economic crisis requires the EU to rethink its strategy and place the interests of people at the heart of its decisionmaking. The ways in which EU economic policy (the Lisbon Strategy 2000 and the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines) restrict government room to manoeuvre in response to the crisis must be addressed as a matter of urgency.

Sinn Féin will continue to work at local, Assembly, Dáil and EU levels to promote viable and effective solutions to the economic crisis that restore a more sustainable prosperity, with greater equality.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Work to change the existing EU economic policy guidelines to promote sustainable economic growth, full employment, social justice and environmental protection.

Oppose market supremacy, deregulation and liberalisation and promote a new approach to economic policy which ensures that sustainable prosperity is underpinned by equality.

Place the ‘green economy’ at the heart of economic development and new job opportunities.

For Using EU Funds to Create Jobs

Getting Irish workers back to work is a priority for Sinn Féin. With the global recession and the financial sector implosion creating a cash flow crisis for Irish businesses, any recovery plan must focus on ensuring that we have the infrastructure, skills, services and access to credit and other supports required to save and create jobs.

There are a number of key areas where EU funds and programmes could help make a difference. The European Commission’s Economic Recovery Plan includes concrete proposals of particular interest to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). And we need to maximise EU assistance to grasp the real opportunities in developing sectors with the greatest potential, including and especially our green economy.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Sinn Féin will take every measure to support and protect public services, and oppose all proposals for liberalisation, deregulation and privatisation. We will campaign to restore the right of the Dáil and Assembly to decide which public services are exempt from EU competition and state aid rules and organise and fund them accordingly.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Oppose the liberalisation and privatisation of key public services (such as education and health) and campaign to ensure that such services remain the exclusive responsibility of Member States.


Campaign for Member States to retain control of key “economic” services such as transport, communications, housing, water and energy services.

Oppose moves to subject health services to market rules and regulations.

For Protecting Workers’ Rights

Despite its prior track record, in recent years the EU has actually weakened the rights of working people and undermined the ability of trade unions to negotiate better conditions for workers. It has also restricted the ability of governments to legislate for improved pay and conditions.

The EU is now promoting insecure employment and lower wages. It is pitting worker against worker, company against company, and country against country in its drive to increase competitiveness through lower wages and worker ‘flexibility’.

Sinn Féin has been to the fore in opposing any move to undermine the pay and conditions of working people in Ireland and across the EU.

Sinn Féin MEPs will continue to promote workers rights, and will:

Fight against the relocation of businesses and jobs to lower wage economies and ensure that companies cannot relocate to other jurisdictions within the EU on this basis.

Campaign for EU support for retraining of workers affected by company closures. Oppose attacks on workers rights, such as the proposed increase of working hours. Continue to campaign for a “Social Progress Clause” in any future EU Treaty which would guarantee that pay and employment conditions cannot be undermined by rulings of the European Court of Justice.

Combat and reverse the rising trend towards precarious work.

Support the equal rights of migrant workers and their families, which effectively protects the rights of all workers.

Support job security and good employment conditions, in opposition to EU proposals to make it easier for employers to fire people and reduce benefits such as holidays and pensions.

Fight against reductions in unemployment benefits and social welfare payments.

For Ending Economic Inequality and Poverty

Work to maximise the job creation potential of EU transport and energy programmes such as TENS (Trans European Networks), Concerto, Intelligent Energy, and Civitas. Encourage access to the EU funds to boost affordable, high speed broadband services in rural areas.

Promote involvement in the sustainable development strategy through projects supported financially under Life+.

Ensure EU funds part-finance a programme of energy efficiency renovations that would provide support to our construction industry, saving jobs and creating jobs while at the same time playing a part in meeting our climate change obligations and tackling fuel poverty.

Continue to support local small and medium businesses to access EU finance. Strengthen SME access to and participation in public procurement specifically by adapting the size of contracts and alleviating the administrative and financial burden in tendering and by using e-procurement.

For Protecting Public Services

Current EU economic policy promotes the opening up of vital public services to private competition (‘liberalisation’). It promotes weaker regulation, encouraging the sort of abuses we have seen recently in the banking sector. The result has been greater deregulation and ultimately privatisation of public services. This has increased social inequality even during periods of economic growth. More fundamentally, such policies are at the root of the present economic crisis.

Some 78 million people across the EU (16% of the total population) are at risk of poverty. In Ireland the figure is higher than the EU average, at 16.5% in the South and 20% in the North. With rising unemployment and falling incomes this situation is getting worse. Some groups in society experience greater inequality than others: children, lone parents, older people, the unemployed, people with disabilities, members of minority groups and those living in disadvantaged areas. People facing multiple discrimination are more likely to be at risk of poverty.

One of the key ways for people to get out of poverty is through employment, which must be a priority, However poverty is also about access to housing and services, and ultimately about human dignity and respect.

Sinn Féin endorses the demand to make social cohesion and the fight against poverty and economic inequality an EU priority.

Sinn Féin brought together MEPs from different Member States and diverse political backgrounds and achieved overwhelming support for a declaration on street homelessness in the European Parliament calling for action by the EU and Member States.

Sinn Féin MEPs will work to ensure:

The European Economic Recovery Plan contributes to the priority of ending poverty and inequality.

Comprehensive EU legislation to protect economic and social rights, and build on progress made with regard to access to goods and services.

Equal access to good quality social, educational, child care and health services, and housing, transport, energy and water services.

Greater EU support for the social economy. EU targets for ending homelessness.

A guaranteed minimum income in order to ensure a dignified life for everybody.

A link between pensions and average earnings.

For Protecting Ireland’s Rural Economy

Agriculture remains one of Ireland’s most important industries. Its cultural and traditional role in Irish society also makes it critically important for Ireland and for Sinn Féin both here at home and in the EU.

Sinn Féin’s MEPs will work with our Agriculture Minister in the north, Michelle Gildernew and our colleagues in the south to ensure that Irish farmers have a strong all-Ireland voice at all levels in the EU.

We know the realities that farmers and in particular small farmers face because of EU regulations and will work with farming organisations to let Europe hear these concerns.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Support reforms of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) that make Irish farming and the rural economy more sustainable and prosperous.

Continue to work with Irish farmers in dealing with the burden of EU regulations. Present an all-Ireland voice for our rural economy especially in practical areas like animal health.

Oppose all EU plans to allow genetically modified (GM) crops to be grown in Ireland, in keeping with our commitment to a GM crop-free Ireland, and support a strict and full liability regime which places the burden on companies and farmers using/producing GM crops.

Brief farmers and rural communities on EU developments, and facilitate their engagement with the EU institutions and other actors.

Support the development of a Rural White Paper (in the North) and the shaping of policies at EU level to support our rural communities and rural economy.

Sacrificing our coastal fishing rights for other short-term perceived advantages has damaged the sustainability of our fishing communities. We will stand with our fishing communities and fight for a better, fairer deal that will allow Ireland to benefit from the resources in our seas and to revitalise our coastal communities.

To protect our natural resources and coastal communities, Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Work to ensure a sustainable future for our fishing communities.

Push for a renegotiation of the CFP to get a better deal for Ireland.

Work with our fishing communities to make sure their voice is heard in Brussels. Assert the primacy of Irish sovereignty in discussions about how our natural resources in our territorial waters are managed.

For Challenging the EU Competition Rules

EU competition regulations (or state aid rules) severely restrict the investments a Member State or regional or local government can make in its own economy. These rules are simply too inflexible to allow for state involvement when it is necessary. Sinn Féin is opposed to this approach, which is based on the EU’s flawed economic strategy.

For example, government investment in rural areas through supporting loss-making rural post offices is questionable under EU rules, as would be moves by the Irish Government or the Assembly to protect

essential industry and jobs. The final decision in these cases rests with the European Court of Justice which has a history of prioritising the free market and private profit over balanced and sustainable social, economic, regional and rural development.

The European Commission and European Court of Justice should not have the power to block essential social, economic or environmental investments. Nor should governments use the EU Competition Rules as a convenient excuse for not properly supporting public services.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Oppose the free-market primacy in the EU’s state aid rules.

Seek an exemption from these rules to allow for the reunification of Ireland as is currently permitted in the case of German reunification.

Challenge any attempt to use these EU rules as an excuse for lack of government action in supporting public services and our essential industries and social infrastructure.

For Making Irish Fisheries Viable

Sinn Féin has been critical of the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) since its inception. We have consistently argued that the CFP amounts to a gross violation of Irish territorial waters. Since Ireland joined the EEC in 1973 over €100 billion worth of fish has been mined from our seas, principally by non-Irish fleets.

For Irish Sovereignty Over Taxation

Recent years have seen the EU gain more power to set the parameters within which national and regional governments can operate their economies, and in particular exercise control over taxation.

VAT rules are already set at EU level. Moves have been made to bring corporation tax into the remit of the EU through the introduction of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB). This is supported by the European Commission and Parliament, as well as many Member States in the European Council – and even some Irish MEPs.

Sinn Féin believes that essential economic policy should be controlled by democratically elected national or regional governments. Sinn Féin MEPs have an impeccable record of defending Ireland’s right to set its own tax base and consequently our own corporate tax rate.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Be the strongest advocates of Irish economic sovereignty and all-Ireland tax harmonisation.

Strengthen Ireland’s voice in opposing greater EU control over taxation including EU-wide tax harmonisation.

For Fair International Trade

The EU is a major economic force but has been using this strength to impose a free trade agenda which benefits corporations instead of using it to promote sustainable development. Because of EU-imposed free trade agreements developing countries have been unable to pursue a natural course of development which would first and foremost serve the needs of their own peoples.

In addition the power that the EU has to negotiate international trade deals on behalf of all Member States has been damaging to certain economic sectors that the EU feels are better and more cheaply undertaken outside the EU.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Seek to safeguard the economic sectors most at risk from globalisation, and in particular agriculture.

Promote fair trade rather than unrestricted free trade as the guiding principle of the EU’s economic relations with other countries.

Campaign for the introduction of a tax on global currency speculation, such as the Tobin Tax.

5. For Robust Environmental Protection

Biodiversity and a clean environment are vital natural resources. Facing us are both challenges in dealing with our waste and habitat loss, and opportunities in using wind, solar and wave energy.

The environment has been a key issue for us in Brussels and Strasbourg. The EU has brought forward much positive environmental protection legislation which Sinn Féin actively supports.

In particular, Sinn Féin has been involved in legislation:

Limiting the effect of chemicals on our health (the REACH Directive).

Shaping future waste management policies promoting reduction, reuse and recycling. Supporting binding targets on renewable energy sources so that Ireland can fully benefit from our potential domestic resources (in particular wind and wave).

Sinn Féin has raised local environmental issues at an EU level such as residents’ groups’ concerns around landfills, incinerators, asbestos dumps and the Shell pipeline at Rossport.

Sinn Féin has campaigned against incinerators in Poolbeg, Rathcoole and other communities across Ireland. At EU level we have opposed moves to brand incineration as “recovery” rather than “disposal”. This reclassification would ultimately mean more incinerators in our communities.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Prioritise environmental protection by supporting the highest level of environmental standards in EU legislation in Strasbourg, and by holding authorities at home to these standards.

Support EU leadership in the promotion of sustainable development at the global, regional and national levels.

Promote concerted action on ecosystems and the development and better implementation of successful EU biodiversity policies such as the Birds and Habitats Directives and the Natura 2000 network of protected areas.

Review all electromagnetic field (EMF) regulations in line with the findings of the Bioinitiative report on the health effects caused by increased exposure to wireless devices.

Call for the revision of EU regulations so that public interest groups can seek judicial reviews of EU decisions in relation to environmental matters.

For Urgent Action on Climate Change

Climate Change represents one of the greatest challenges facing Ireland and Europe. Sinn Féin has contributed greatly to shaping EU and Irish

policy on climate change. We have engaged with experts at home and across Europe on different aspects of climate change.

Our approach to climate change is to recognise it as not just a northern or southern or even Irish problem but to place it in its international context. Our membership of the European Parliament’s Temporary Committee on Climate Change has allowed us to input our ideas at each point of decision-making – locally, nationally and at EU level.

We support binding legislation committing the government in the South to cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least 3% annually in order to meet international obligations, and have prioritised climate action in our input into the Programme for Government in the North.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Seek to have climate goals incorporated across a range of policy areas.

Resist attempts to reduce targets for emissions cuts set by Brussels.

Push for a progressive mandate to be given to EU, through our role in the European Parliament, in future world climate talks. Support the Copenhagen Pledge drawn up by Christian Aid in advance of the UN climate talks in December 2009.

Work to ensure that developing nations are treated fairly and adequately supported by the EU to play their role in coping with the global challenges of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This should include new and additional funding over and above Overseas Development Aid.

Campaign in particular for finance to stop and reverse deforestation.

Continue to promote opportunities in renewable energy and energy efficiency as a way of boosting the local economy and tackling climate change and fuel poverty. Work to make the EU target for a 20% increase in energy efficiency by 2020 mandatory.

Unequivocally reject the use and promotion of nuclear energy in Ireland and across Europe and continue to campaign for the closure of Sellafield.

Work to end EU subsidies from export credit agencies and public investment banks for nuclear projects.

Campaign for greater financial and legislative incentives for energy efficiency and renewable energy.

For Safe Renewable Energy and Against Nuclear Power

Energy has become a major issue in the EU and at home. Renewable energy must become one of the growth areas for Ireland, North and South in the time ahead. Sinn Féin believes that an all-Ireland energy network powered by a domestic, renewable supply provides the best means of energy security for Ireland. We are endowed with huge potential in renewable energy resources and should invest in these clean technologies as a priority.

We support the mandatory EU target of 20% for renewable energy use by 2020. We reject completely suggestions that nuclear energy has any role to play in reducing Ireland’s carbon emissions, as it is not a safe renewable source.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Support moves to increase the output of renewable energy across Ireland, including biofuels where these are environmentally and socially sustainable.

Campaign for an all-Ireland energy network that is self-sufficient and sustainable.

6. For Equality, Human Rights and Civil Liberties

Freedom, justice and human rights should be the cornerstone of EU policy on Justice and Home Affairs. However much of the EU’s current policy is fixated on increasing surveillance and restrictions on people’s rights – creating instead a Fortress Europe security state.

This is the principal reason we oppose the trend towards EU integration and centralisation of policing and judicial powers. However we also believe that these are primarily matters for sovereign states. To be valid, any EU harmonisation or cooperation measures should require unanimity and also have as their objective the increased protection of human rights.

Sinn Féin supports measures which genuinely combat international crime or assist legitimate freedom of movement. Any EU-wide cooperation systems in policing or migration management must be guided by human rights standards and accompanied by the necessary accountability and oversight mechanisms to ensure they are not abused. We do not support the Schengen system as we believe that it does not meet these criteria.

Sinn Féin supports comprehensive EU legislation to protect and promote equality and diversity, human rights and civil liberties. Our MEPs will oppose any EU measure which is not fully human rightscompliant and consistent with international law.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Promote the right to participate to the EU decision-making process and campaign for full and equal accessibility of the EU institutions and its facilities.

Continue to help women, older people, people with disabilities, LGBT people, migrants and asylum seekers to bring their issues directly to EU decision makers and ensure their voices are heard in Europe, through participation in Inter-Group and other mechanisms.

Build on progress made in relation to the Directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation.

Promote EU support for disability mainstreaming, disability-proofing, universal design requirements and the right to live independently.

Work to ensure that older people can move freely within the EU without losing their pension rights.

Support the European Women’s Lobby ‘50/50 Campaign’, demanding equal gender representation in all EU institutions. (We note with pride that the Sinn Féin EU election slate is more than 50% women.) Support the equal rights of LGBT citizens, including the rights to freedom of movement and family reunification through partnership recognition, an inclusive definition of the family in EU law and policy, and explicit recognition of transgender people’s equal rights.

Support the right of all persons seeking protection to be treated according to the same highest standards across all Member States.

Oppose detention of asylum seekers.

Work to end the restriction of asylum seekers’ and refugees’ access to employment.

Promote the right to family reunification. Support EU-level and international cooperation in criminal justice matters where this clearly serves the public interest. Not agree to cede national sovereignty over or democratic oversight of, and oppose any moves towards establishing exclusive EU competence over, any area of justice. Ensure robust scrutiny of all EU measures proposed under Justice and Home Affairs at European Parliament, Oireachtas and Assembly level post-devolution, to ensure that these adhere to human rights and international law standards, contain adequate safeguards, and serve the best interests of the Irish people.

Sinn Féin has pushed consistently for a removal of these derogations which still make conducting business through our first language very difficult in the EU. We will continue to campaign for equality for Irish speakers in the EU institutions and for Irish speakers dealing with these institutions.

We have also used our influence at the EU level to push the case for an Irish language Act in the Six Counties.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Continue to use Irish in our work and push the EU bodies to respect the rights of Irish speakers.

Pressure the Irish Government to meet its commitments in providing an adequate number of Irish interpreters and translators. Encourage the Irish Government to develop Irish-language courses in Gaeltacht areas specifically targeted at interpreters and translators from different language backgrounds.

Continue to work with others to ensure the provision of information to schools on careers for Irish speakers in EU institution. Empower Irish language activists in their campaigns for an Irish Language Act through facilitating delegations to meet relevant people at the EU level.

Build alliances with other indigenous and minority language rights activists from across the EU.

7. For Irish Neutrality and Global Social Justice

The EU is progressively integrating its military efforts with those of the NATO military alliance. In this process the interests of neutral countries such as Ireland are brushed aside. The Lisbon Treaty accelerates this process.

Sinn Féin believes that international relations and international justice and peace are best served by strengthening the only fully inclusive multilateral forum, the United Nations. While EU member states acting together can have a positive effect on international relations, we do not accept the existing Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) nor do we accept the legitimacy of establishing an EU Common Defence. Indeed such measures actively undermine the development of the United Nations and a more socially just international order.

Sinn Féin MEPs will:

Oppose the drive to integrate foreign and defence policy among EU Member States and to subordinate this policy to NATO, and campaign for the restoration of an independent Irish foreign policy.

Campaign for an EU Global Social Justice Agenda with an emphasis on the Millennium Development Goals, Trade Justice, and UN reform.


Argue for a progressive and peaceful policy within the EU.

Campaign for the rights of oppressed peoples and stateless nations.

Support UN-led conflict prevention, dispute mediation, peace negotiation, peace enforcement and peacekeeping operations, elections or other human rights monitoring, and post-conflict capacity building. Campaign for legally binding provisions to ensure that EU companies operating outside the EU do not violate human rights or undermine environmental sustainability. Continue to campaign against the imposition of Economic Partnership Agreements that damage developing country economies. Continue to use the European Parliament as a forum to voice opposition to the occupation of the Palestinian Territories by Israel and to call for the suspension of EU preferential trade with Israel until such time as that state fully complies with international law.

For the Language Rights of Irish Speakers

Since 2007 Irish has been an official working language of the European Union after a successful campaign by STÁDAS and other Irish language rights advocates. Whilst this development was warmly welcomed by Sinn Féin we are not content to accept the derogations and exceptions that came with it to remain in place.

To call on the EU to provide reconstruction aid to Occupied Palestine and Gaza in particular on an urgent basis, and call on the EU and its Member States to back immediate and all-inclusive negotiations leading to a durable peace settlement that will provide for two states, including a sovereign Palestinian state that is viable and sustainable.

