On Friday 7th June your vote in the European elections can help deliver a Social Europe that works for all.

FOREWORD

OUR EUROPEAN PRIORITIES ARE

It matters who we send to the European Parliament to represent Ireland. Labour is a member of the Party of European Socialists, the largest progressive force in the EU. We want to shape a society based on the ideals of democracy, and the equal rights of all people. Our goal is for people to live and be equal in a society based on principles of solidarity.

We want a Europe that works for all. No country can face the challenges of our times alone.

Over the last five years, Europe has faced multiple crises. Our Party of European Socialists has delivered solutions on jobs and the cost of living, on the environment and the climate emergency, on the Covid-19 pandemic, the regulation of big tech, and the rule of law.

Delivering a European Plan for Affordable Housing.

Fighting for better jobs and higher wages.

Building a Social Europe and ensuring the rich pay their fair share.

A Just Transition on climate and lower energy prices.

Protecting our democracy and fighting the far right.

A Feminist Europe and protecting the rights of minorities.

As the far right becomes a growing force across Europe, it is crucial Ireland sends strong and progressive voices to represent us in the Socialists and Democrats group, the grouping to which we in the Labour Party belong. Ireland cannot afford to allow the right to become the dominant force across Europe. We know all too well that these conservative and reactionary forces do not have what it takes to address the issues that affect us all in our daily lives. Worse still, they prefer to exploit differences and use fear to achieve their agenda.

A Europe that promotes peace, security and development.

Too many of the voices in Brussels now do not represent our values, so we must have change. With your support, we can return Labour voices for Europe in June, Labour representatives who will stand for equality, solidarity, and fairness.

If you want a just transition for a sustainable economy, an EU plan for affordable housing, MEPs who stand firm against the far right, and European solidarity with the people of Gaza and Ukraine, then I’m asking you to vote for Aodhán Ó Riordain in Dublin, Niamh Hourigan in Ireland South and Fergal Landy in Midlands North West.

In Solidarity,

A SOCIAL EUROPE THAT WORKS FOR ALL

A MORE SOCIAL EUROPE

For well paid jobs and higher incomes, workers rights, social progress, better healthcare and public services.

What Labour stands for

We want a social Europe that works for all, and leaves no one behind. Ours is a vision that focuses on improving the quality of life for people in Ireland and across Europe.

This is central to the political choices facing voters in this election.

To tackle the cost of living crisis, people need better jobs, and higher incomes. That’s why Europe needs a pay rise. Those with the most must pay their fair share, and no one must be left behind. Access to good public services must be protected and improved.

The Challenge we face

Soaring prices for food and energy, and economic uncertainty have left people squeezed. People need public investment to restore health care, education and other public services that have been deprived of money for far too long. And after years of wages not keeping pace with economic growth, European workers need a pay rise!

Technological change from artificial intelligence and digital platforms is changing the world of work, putting jobs at risk and driving insecurity while unregulated social media drives division.

An aging population puts pressure on public services, and care work remains undervalued.

Our Mission – what your Labour MEPs will do:

As the economy and the needs of our society evolve, we must bring people with us at local, national and EU level. This means giving them a stake in the decisions made, by respecting trade union rights, and campaigning for stronger public services.

WORKERS RIGHTS

Europe needs a Roadmap for Quality Work and Well-Paid Jobs, to promote wage increases, quality jobs and to insulate workers from the rising cost of living. The EU needs decisive measures to promote pay equity and stronger action to eliminate the gender pay and pensions gap.

End precarious work and improve working conditions. Guarantee the legal right to permanent contracts and full-time work, and a ban on unpaid internships. Employees need more flexible control over their working week, and the right to disconnect. There must be a ban on invasive and disrespectful surveillance when at work, and more progress to reduce working time while maintaining pay, such as the four-day week.

Support trade unions, collective bargaining, and social dialogue. Defend and strengthen the universal right to organise, union access to workplaces, the right to bargain collectively, and the right to strike. There must be an increase in collective bargaining coverage, including through an ambitious transposition of the Directive on Adequate Minimum Wages, targeting 80% coverage, and the Directive on Gender Pay Transparency.

Reinforce democracy at work. Strengthen collective bargaining, and introduce a comprehensive EU framework on information, consultation, and participation. Ensure well-functioning collective bargaining systems are protected and promote greater democratic justice in the workplace by supporting workers’ co-operatives over multinationals.

Strengthen the mandate of the European Labour Authority with investigative and sanctioning power to tackle labour exploitation, and social dumping. There must also be a limit on subcontracting through a new EU general legal framework, and joint and several liability through the supply chain.

Ensure Safe work. Improve and expand the EU occupational health and safety legislation and other European initiatives to achieve zero deaths at work or caused by work, including domestic workers.

• Address psychosocial risks, including mental health risks, online harassment and shaming at work through a European Directive.

• Introduce EU legislation that establishes temperature limits for work.

• Develop initiatives to ensure the full enforcement of workers and trade union rights and reinforce labour and social law inspection services and complaint mechanisms.

• Ensure an end to all forms of gender-based violence in the world of work, including online.

Regulate artificial intelligence and the use of algorithms in the workplace. Guarantee a just digital transformation based on human-centred digitalisation and the effective regulation of AI with the ‘human in control’ principle incorporated into EU law. We cannot let the business interests of Big Tech companies or algorithmic management undermine democracy and working conditions.

SOCIAL RIGHTS AND SOLIDARITY

Establish a Social Progress Protocol, to be included in the Treaties, to guarantee that workers’ and social rights take precedence over economic freedoms.

Ensure the European Pillar of Social Rights continues to guide the work of the next Commission.

Develop minimum standards for worker social security benefits building on the success of SURE (Support to Mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency) and provide for a European complementary unemployment reinsurance mechanism in the event of a spike in unemployment.

Provide for a European Social Security Pass and a European Labour Card. This will ensure better traceability of social security rights and exploitative labour practices.

Introduce a European Anti-Poverty Strategy and allocate at least €20 billion to the European Child Guarantee with more ambitious child poverty reduction targets and promote and protect the rights of all children. Support an EU Directive on minimum income.

Fight for universal and well-funded public services which provide security to all. We want the EU to promote quality public services, not hinder them.

Defend the rights of older workers and pensioners and introduce a White Paper on Aging proposing social and economic measures related to Europe’s aging population, and an EU Strategy on Age Equality.

Implement and enhance the European Care Strategy to a holistic “Care Deal for Europe”, ensure the Care Strategy is transposed into national legislation with appropriate monitoring and assessment. Ensure other EU policy initiatives also take account and address the needs of family carers.

EDUCATION AND OPPORTUNITY

Promote extended funding for the Youth Guarantee and introduce binding quality standards for offers including fair pay and access to social protection.

Commit to clear targets for the effective implementation of the European Education Area by 2025 such as the automatic mutual recognition of diplomas across the EU.

Campaign for a stronger Erasmus+. This should be accessible to all so that it better supports those from disadvantaged backgrounds and extended for workers to engage in training and upskilling across the EU, with a green Erasmus to upskill for the climate transition.

Develop a European Education Plan to ensure quality education including a right for all to lifelong training without cost to the worker and during working time. Promote and invest into accessible and inclusive vocational education and training.

Increase support for structural and sustainable funding for culture and access to culture, and safeguard the Creative Europe Programme.

ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE AND MEDICINES Covid-19 showed the essential contribution of the EU to ensuring access to medicines and equipment. Health must be a priority of the next European Parliament and Commission work programme. The EU must protect universal access to quality healthcare and social care as a fundamental right.

We want a European Health Union to manage future pandemic responses, protect universal access to care and treatment, and to support and defend public healthcare at a national level.

Europe needs an ambitious and strong Mental Health Strategy.

Implement fair and transparent pricing of medicines that prevents shortages and supports innovation, and access to new treatments for rare diseases.

Develop a comprehensive EU Cardiovascular Health Plan as part of a strategy to prioritise the public health challenge from non-communicable diseases, and ensure dementia is prioritised in the next health programme of the EU.

EU drug control policy must be rebalanced to move away from the failed war on illegal drugs, and adopt a health led approach to addiction and misuse by ending the current prioritisation of law enforcement over health.

Support initiatives for common European public research on vaccines, lifesaving medicines and antimicrobial resistance.

A JUST TRANSITION

For climate action, secure and affordable energy, sustainable rural communities and a circular economy.

What Labour stands for

We respect nature, our planet and our place within it. We believe those with the greatest capacity to change must carry the greatest load.

The fight against climate change is also a fight against inequality, and a social Europe must deliver a just transition where we prepare for sustainable jobs and lifestyles.

Our Social Europe can be a climate world leader for job creation and sustainable economics.

The Challenge we face

Our planet is rapidly warming and it is getting harder to stay within the target of two degrees of warming, never mind the 1.5°C target in the Paris Agreement. Far too many politicians, large corporations, petro-states and vested interests will delay and oppose meaningful climate action.

The right have attacked and undermined European laws on emissions and biodiversity while the rise of the far right will see more efforts to stop climate action.

Only a stronger Party of European Socialists can stand in their way.

We must be honest about the challenges that face agriculture, forestry and fishing. This will mean changes for the Common Agriculture Policy and the Common Fisheries Policy while protecting food security.

Marginalisation of some communities and regions, and poor regional representation in Ireland makes the disconnect worse

We must also address the future challenges of climate-based migration.

Our Mission - what Labour MEPs will do:

Our European vision is net zero by 2050, and across the EU a reduction in carbon emissions by at least 55% by 2030.

We must maintain ambitious targets but bring communities with us in areas that have been left behind, by creating employment, being inclusive in the implementation of policy and clearly explaining why action is needed.

Climate justice requires coordinated EU action, such as an Energy Union, and the speedy roll-out of a supergrid, sustainable transport coordination and a commitment to phasing out fossil fuels.

Our Party has led in Europe on efforts to reduce emissions and deliver on the European Green Deal, the Climate Law, and the Fit for 55 package. In the Parliament, our S&D grouping

has led on Nature Restoration and Energy Efficiency standards, and the recent Right to Repair circular economy law.

As we transition to renewable energy, we must ensure everyone has access to secure and affordable energy. The soaring price of natural gas in recent years has distorted our energy markets and driven up electricity and heating costs. The climate transition is our opportunity to strengthen regulation, remake the market and support ordinary families.

We have a duty to provide more affordable energy to support ordinary families, jobs and keep our enterprises competitive. Only at European level can we act collectively to remake the electricity market to provide security of supply.

We must support rural communities to act sustainability and maintain food security while protecting our land and waters. The new Common Agricultural Policy should reflect these needs.

Only at an EU level can we make the lasting changes to adapt and mitigate climate breakdown and make the shift to save our planet.

OUR KEY CLIMATE PRIORITIES

Net Zero by 2050 at the latest and reduce emissions by at least 55% by 2030. We need ambitious EU-wide post-2030 intermediate targets for 2035 and 2040 in accordance with the European Climate Law and scientific recommendations.

The international commitment in the Paris Agreement by the EU to become climate neutral should be reflected in any future revision of the EU treaties.

We must maintain international pressure to ensure global warming is kept below two degrees Celsius.

We must ensure that the climate transition leaves no one behind and is socially fair.

FOR AFFORDABLE ENERGY

Reform the wholesale electricity market to ensure more affordable energy, with a long-term strategy on pricing and investment in renewable sources.

Protect people from energy poverty and ensure social cohesion by designating energy as a social service of general interest.

Intensify investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency. Aim for a 100% renewable or low-carbon energy mix to ensure energy independence, affordability and sustainability.

Accelerate the roll out of renewable-based power and renewable energy production chain capacities, including renewable hydrogen to completely phase out fossil fuels, and address strategic energy independence needs.

Focus on the development of clean technologies, including the production of renewable hydrogen, to ensure that Europe is the leading force in green energy production and the maintenance of a competitive industry with quality jobs.

Ensure energy cohesion, and an efficient energy system by investing in sufficient renewable energy production, in EU strategic infrastructure and a pan- European energy grid and storage facility that ensures uninterrupted energy supply throughout Europe.

FOR A JUST TRANSITION

Establish social protection schemes with EU support to protect people from the impacts of climate change and environmental degradation on their jobs and living standards.

Ensure younger generations have a say in our climate future.

Accelerate climate action in all sectors of the EU economy including transport and land sectors with increased rail usage, and sustainable aviation and maritime fuel. Seek at a European level the introduction of levies on private jets and yachts.

Campaign for more sustainable transport options to connect Ireland with Europe, and support clean and affordable public transport.

CIRCULAR ECONOMY

Incentivise more sustainable modes of production and consumption to build a circular economy.

Reduce waste through the sustainable use of raw materials and empower consumers to be more climate conscious with ‘right to repair’ measures such as a digital product passport outlining the components within, and instructions on how to repair it, and dispose of it so that high-value materials are reused.

Invest in a Green and Digital Transition that is focused on climate action, to create new jobs, reindustrialise our economies and make it innovative, competitive, and circular.

BIODIVERSITY

Restore Europe’s forests, air, seas, water and soil, reverse deforestation, ensure the protection of natural reserves and fight for strong implementation of the Nature Restoration Law. Provide incentives for carbon capture, water filtration and clean air provision.

Promote more sustainable and environmentally friendly fishing practices and seek a review of Ireland’s fish quotas.

Strengthen animal welfare standards through the adoption of strong and ambitious legislation.

Reduce the amount of microplastics released into our seas, air, and soil and ensure a complete ban on intentionally added microplastics in products.

Promote the use of environmentally friendly pest control systems and reduce the use of chemical pesticides. Member States should set targets to reduce their pesticide use.

A SOCIAL EUROPE THAT WORKS FOR ALL

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND RURAL COMMUNITIES

European agriculture, fishing and aquaculture must become more sustainable, in line with the Farm to Fork Strategy. That means the Common Agricultural Policy must contribute to our climate transition and increase biodiversity while securing sustainable long-term food production.

Strengthen the Common Agricultural Policy to support farmers, especially young, women, small-scale farmers, and agricultural workers, with more funds flowing towards smaller farmers, and those who meet environmental and biodiversity criteria.

Support farmers’ incomes and jobs, while protecting them from unfair competition from third countries and price speculation; and ensure fair prices in the value chain.

Safeguard food security by ensuring the resilience of our sustainable food production and consumption, restoring nature, and ensuring the affordability of healthy food, including organic food.

Farmers must be supported financially and technically to reach the targets to transition to environmentally friendly farming methods, improve soil and land management, and protect biodiversity.

Keep delivering on an ambitious Cohesion Policy across Europe to improve quality of life in rural areas and the regions, and work to deliver new funding through the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and European Social Fund Plus (ESF+).

Introduce new dimensions to the concept of “rural proofing”, such as demographic impact, job creation, educational framework and gender impact to better take into account the reality of rural areas in EU policies.

A EUROPEAN PLAN FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING

For secure and affordable housing, that is good quality and energy efficient in well planned communities.

What Labour stands for

We believe everyone is entitled to a home. Our European family will stand up for the right to housing, and fight homelessness. The provision of housing is, and should always be a public good, not a commodity for market speculation.

The Challenge we face

In Ireland and across Europe housing has become unaffordable and in short supply. Speculators and investors have driven up prices, while short term rentals have priced many out of their own cities.

This has driven insecurity for workers and families, but Europe can help through collective action to protect people seeking to buy or rent a home and provide more security for those in a home.

Our Mission – what Labour MEPs will do:

The State must provide affordable public housing. All around Europe, cities and other public authorities build and provide quality public housing that is affordable and available to all. In some European cities more than half the population rents high quality public housing. Public housing must become a more common option in Ireland.

Labour is calling for a European Plan for Affordable Housing and we will work to enhance European support for a state-led resolution of Ireland’s housing affordability crisis. To deliver on this, Labour MEPs will campaign for:

The introduction of a European Plan for Affordable Housing that reforms state aid and fiscal rules to ensure national and local authorities can invest more in public housing.

More funding to be delivered through EU funds and the European Investment Bank for public housing.

Anti-speculation policies to target investment and vulture funds accumulating housing, and the explosive growth of short-term apartment rentals.

Tougher regulations to prevent housing being left vacant and avoid the privatisation of public or social housing.

Improvements to the safety of buildings by developing an EU wide residential fire safety strategy as part of the wave of retrofitting and renovations to improve energy efficiency.

Stronger EU programmes to improve energy efficiency of buildings as part of the Renovation Wave building on the work of projected like SHAPE-EU, and for more sustainable, inclusive and beautiful communities as part of the New European Bauhaus Initiative.

Designation at an EU level of areas vulnerable to energy poverty through audits of building stock, opening up new funding for renovation and energy.

The development of a single EU market for housing finance to help drive down both construction and mortgage costs for future homeowners.

Safer spaces for women and girls by ensuring that local areas implement a safe space audit programme in their communities which looks at safe urban design, proper street lighting and the elimination of derelict buildings.

The introduction of affordable and quality housing indicators in the European semester.

DEMOCRACY, EQUALITY AND JUSTICE

For stronger democratic and social rights standing against extremists and those stoking fear and division.

What Labour stands for

The European Union is far more than an economic union, it is a community of values, a powerful engine of progressive social change, that protects our rights to equality, democracy, and freedom.

Everyone has the right to participate in their community and society, in safety and without fear. We respect equality before the law, nonviolence and solidarity between communities. We promote social justice and equality.

Europe is built on democracy, freedom, fair economic cooperation and social cohesion.

The Challenge we face

The rise of the far-right in Europe is a threat to the European project, to citizens and their rights and personal well-being. It is a poison for democracy. Where extremists have attained power, they take away workers’ rights, including the right to strike; they undermine press freedom and the rule of law; they attack women’s rights and try to cancel LGBTQI+ rights. They apply authoritarian, autocratic means to undermine freedom and democracy.

They feed off conspiracy theories, and exploit fears about migration to divide society.

Our Mission – what Labour MEPs will do:

The economic measures favoured by the right have had a terrible impact on social cohesion and democratic stability. We want clear conditions to defend the rule of law and ensure that no EU funding reaches autocratic governments.

Labour and the Party of European Socialists will advocate for those who feel left behind, and enable people to participate in their community and society. We want a feminist Europe and strong measures to tackle discrimination.

DEFEND DEMOCRACY AND THE RULE OF LAW

Protect the rights of those most affected by the far right and its policies through protections for minorities, press and public institutions.

Apply clear and comprehensive conditions to EU funding to defend the rule of law and ensure grants of European funding to Member States are conditional on full respect for fundamental democratic values and human rights.

Fight for strong rules to tackle disinformation on social media, to safeguard privacy and to protect everyone from hate speech, online violence, and harassment.

Fight to preserve and promote the pluralism and independence of media with the European Media Freedom Act (EMFA) and a strong anti-SLAPPS directive.

Protect civic space and stand up for civil society and their ability to contribute to decision making. Uphold the right to freedom of association, expression, and peaceful assembly. Advocate for the greater inclusion of the community and voluntary sector in EU policy development and programme design.

Unblock the Anti-Discrimination Directive in the Council as a tool to fight racism and discrimination.

Ensure social media platforms protect rights online, are transparent and held accountable for their algorithms, and prioritise the online safety of children and young people.

SUPPORT A FEMINIST EUROPE

At every level, women must be equal participants in decision-making, negotiations, and solutions, but the EU is still far from being the Union of Equality that we want. The fight for gender equality must be reflected in all policies and budgets.

Ensure that sexual and reproductive rights are fully respected, and include the right to free, safe and legal abortion care in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. Implement the Party of European Socialists programme towards eradicating genderbased violence including:

• A comprehensive legal framework addressing the continuum of violence against women and girls, with a dedicated directive that contains a consent-based definition of rape, and all forms of sexual abuse, including a unified EU definition of femicide, and extended list of EU crimes.

• Ratification and ascension by the EU to both the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the International Labour Organisation Convention (ILO) on combatting violence and harassment in the world of work.

• Implementation of a dedicated directive that specifically tackles online violence and cyber-violence against women and girls.

• Monitor the ratification of the Istanbul Convention by the EU and insist on the ratification by all member states.

Implement gender impact assessment, gender mainstreaming and gender budgeting of all European policies and governance.

PROMOTE A EUROPE FREE FROM DISCRIMINATION Fight for a strong Equal Treatment Directive by prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of age, disability, sexual orientation, religion, or belief for access to social protection and social advantage, education and access to goods and services including housing.

Protect LGBTQI+ rights everywhere with the implementation of the LGBTI Equality Strategy.

Remove barriers to anti-discrimination and hate crime legislation to adequately cover sexual orientation, gender identity and sex characteristics.

Adopt the Recognition of Parenthood Regulation to strengthen rights of children in cross-border situations, especially relevant for rainbow families.

Implement the EU Strategy on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2021-2030, increase the number of persons with disabilities working in EU institutions, and maximise accessibility of the electoral process. Respect and promote the rights and dignity of autistic people.

Introduce an ambitious EU-wide Disability Card to guarantee the free movement of persons with disabilities.

Push for an EU strategy on Age Equality to fight ageism and recognise the impact of people living longer.

DEFEND THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF PEOPLE ON THE MOVE

Wherever we come from, we all have a right to feel safe. As a caring society, we have a responsibility to protect the human rights of people seeking asylum.

Europe needs to have a common and coordinated system for migration and asylum based on solidarity and shared responsibility. We stand for well-managed migration with safe pathways, proactive labour market integration, and stronger inclusion policies.

Ensure the Pact on Migration and Asylum is implemented to the highest possible human rights standards in a fair, safe, sustainable, and predictable way. There must be humane reception conditions and the rights of people seeking asylum must be protected.

Advocate for an EU Marshall Plan for our near abroad to address the underlying reasons for migration and recognise the impact of climate change on future migration.

Protect migrants and people seeking asylum from exploitation and trafficking with the strengthening of the Anti-Trafficking Directive, and a zero-tolerance approach to human trafficking.

Save lives in the Mediterranean and at external borders, with the reintroduction of an EU search and rescue mechanism.

A SOCIAL EUROPE THAT WORKS FOR ALL

PEACE, SECURITY AND DEVELOPMENT

For global justice, shared prosperity and solidarity, both in the EU and with the broader world.

What Labour stands for

The Labour Party is committed to the EU as a peace project through sharing sovereignty and democratic institutions. It has helped bring peace in our own island as well as across the continent. Our Irish neutrality is completely aligned with this approach, as is our history.

We believe in fostering greater cooperation and coordination across the EU, and ensuring the EU uses its global power as a trading block for the common good.

The EU is a historic project of progress that has brought peace and shared prosperity to our continent over the past decades and that gives us common strength to shape our future together as Europeans.

The Challenge

The brutal invasion of Ukraine by Russia and its ongoing aggression is a war on our European values and confirms the need for international solidarity and greater collaboration. New threats from cyber terrorism and transnational crime is a further threat.

The horrific attack by Hamas on October 7th and the Israeli genocide against the people of Gaza has divided Europe, as thousands of innocent victims are killed and maimed while famine conditions develop due to a lack of humanitarian aid.

Ireland’s military neutrality is also coming under pressure from those seeking to militarise the EU, while climate change and new technologies will cause further uncertainty.

Our Mission – what Labour MEPs will do:

We see Europe as a project of peace and shared prosperity.

Progressives must reassert the value of the EU as a soft power, and a peace project. Enlargement is a means to raise democratic standards in new member states and promote peace. The diplomatic and political power of the EU on the global stage must be carefully managed, while respecting the military neutrality and individual foreign policy positions of member states.

SUPPORTING PEACE AND FUNDAMENTAL VALUES

Defend Ireland’s military neutrality and ensure it is recognised and protected in any future developments of the Common Security and Defence Policy, and oppose moves towards a deeper militarisation of the EU. Ireland must invest in our Defence Forces and improve their terms and conditions.

There must be an immediate and permanent ceasefire in Gaza, the release of all hostages, unimpeded access for humanitarian aid, an end to the illegal occupation of Palestinian land and prosecutions for all those involved in war crimes. We support a two-state solution for Palestine and Israel, and will work towards trade sanctions on Israel due to its actions against the Palestinian people, up to and including the severing of the EU-Israel Association Agreement.

Support Ukraine’s resistance to the Russian invasion, and the development of a reconstruction plan for Ukraine using frozen Russian assets to partially fund it.

Support EU enlargement based on the full respect of workers’ and social rights, social dialogue, and the EU social acquis with membership pathways for Ukraine, Moldova and countries in the Western Balkans. We are deeply concerned at recent developments in Georgia which undermines their European aspirations.

Work for increased delivery and funding for the EU-UK PEACE PLUS programme in support of the Good Friday Agreement and peace on our island and ensure there is a successor programme in place after 2027.

Oppose the use of Horizon Europe research programme funding for dual use military purposes.

Reassess the current trade and development portfolio of the EU in light of the impact of the war in Ukraine, investing in our good relations with third countries.

Increase European cooperation to fight cross-border and organised crime.

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND COOPERATION

Set up an EU comprehensive strategy for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

Promote workers’ rights globally with strong support for the International Labour Organisation.

Increase EU support to human rights defenders and civil society worldwide.

Ensure the EU works to protect persons with disabilities in conflict areas and promote the international implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Renew the dialogue with the African Union on migration, development, trade, security and climate change.

Strengthen further EU cooperation within the United Nations, promote ambitious UN reform in favour of transparency, accountability, and effectiveness, and fully commit to the Agenda 2030 and the development of an ambitious and effective successor.

Support the Belarussian democratic movement, civil society and democratic forces in exile.

FAIR AND SUSTAINABLE TRADE

Develop an ambitious, sustainable and open EU trade agenda based on common values and respect for human rights, and strong social, labour, environmental, and consumer protection standards. Ensure future trade deals are fair and do not have investor tribunals. We must now also complete withdrawal from the Energy Charter Treaty.

Reform of the World Trade Organisation to make it fit for the challenges of the 21st century, the green transition, and the digital revolution, ensuring a level playing field.

Ensure the effective transposition of the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive to improve human rights and protect workers in companies and supply chains.

A STRONGER AND REFORMED UNION

A forward looking EU ready to meet the challenges of the future

What Labour stands for

We believe in a more democratic Union that is responsive to the needs of European citizens and where the wealthiest make a fair contribution.

Markets and international trade must be strongly regulated to serve people, not speculators.

We want to promote the European model of a social market economy with strong public investment to develop a resilient, sustainable and fair economy that delivers quality jobs.

The Challenge we face

The EU cannot stand still and must adapt to the global challenges we face.

People’s voices must be heard in the institutions, and action taken to address their concerns.

Private investment alone will never meet the challenges of the climate transition, and the housing crisis.

Our Mission – what Labour MEPs will do:

The European Union can be reformed and made stronger because as our world rapidly changes, the structures of the EU must adapt to the challenges people face.

To do more the EU will need more of its own resources and must develop a strong industrial policy to create the jobs of the future.

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

Promote reform of the European institutions to ensure a more social and democratic EU.

Strengthen the democratic role of the European Parliament, moving towards the right of initiative.

Ensure the Commission is gender balanced by having each country propose a male and female nominee and develop a new post of a Commissioner for Women.

Establish a formal and permanent Council configuration for gender equality, diversity, and anti-discrimination.

Modernise European architecture to adapt it to new realities, including by extending qualified majority voting to certain critical sectors.

Support the provision of Irish language interpretation in the Parliament with the employment of more interpreters with Gaeilge, and the inclusion of Irish language development and financial support in EU programmes.

PROGRESSIVE ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL POLICIES

EU public procurement rules should be revised to ensure that public money goes to organisations that respect workers’ and trade union rights, that negotiate with trade unions and whose workers are covered by collective agreements.

Put forward a new Investment Plan for the Green and Digital Transitions, and for a permanent long-term EU investment capacity. Provide member states with the necessary room for manoeuvre to finance the investments.

Integrate gender budgeting into the next EU Multiannual Financial Framework (seven year budget) and extend gender impact assessments to all European policies and governance.

Explore new sources of revenue to allow the EU budget to support investment in all Member States.

Develop a “Made in Europe” 2030 strategy as part of a strong European industrial policy that underpins quality jobs and social progress with significant and effective public and private investment.

Support a fair Single Market for goods and services, with clear state aid rules and a new approach to competition policy that levels the global playing field for European industries.

Regulate financial, energy and food commodities markets and tackle speculation while guaranteeing universal rights-based access to high-quality public services, including childcare and transport.

Support social enterprises, co-operatives, SMEs, start-ups and the self-employed to access the European market to grow and thrive.

TAX JUSTICE FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE

Income from wealth should not be taxed less than wages. In the EU the top 1% own 25% of all wealth. Acting at an EU level will ensure avoidance is harder. Rising corporate profits account for almost half the increase in Europe’s inflation over the last year. We need to stop greedflation.

Advocate for an EU wealth tax to target mobile wealth and the ultrarich, and support coordinated taxation of capital gains in EU Member States.

Continue the efforts to establish a Financial Transactions Tax by relaunching the enhanced cooperation process to achieve an FTT in as many Member States as possible.

Push for the European Commission to assess an excise duty on the repurchase of shares by corporations, and a single market levy on those multinationals that benefit most to make the common single market fairer.

Address profit-driven inflation and continue to support the European framework to recover windfall corporate profits, especially on the energy market.

Support the ongoing implementation of the OECD/G20 minimum corporation tax agreements.

