Opening statement

In the last year Aontú has come of age. Our vote has surpassed Labour, the Soc Dens and PbP in the last election. We were the only party that stood with the people in the recent referendums. We made the common-sense argument and we won.

Indeed, Aontú has, for the last five years, Aontú has often stood alone in the Dáil for you. We have held our ground in your interest. Whether it has been raising real concerns about the phenomenal government waste, the disastrous government immigration policy, why 100,000 homes remain empty in the middle of a housing crisis, censorship legislation or carbon taxes on fuel, we have been on the right side of the argument – your side.

We are offering a step change in how this country is governed. We want to end the culture of waste, lack of accountability and indifference shown to many across the state who need government to deliver for them.

We have done that with one TD. Imagine the impact we can have with a team of Aontú TDs fighting your corner and standing firm on issues that matter to you, your business and your family. That power is now in your hands. You can change the direction of this country with your vote.

We have proven that we can deliver, and more importantly, that no matter what way the wind blows or how many other parties follow the latest trend, we will be resolute in what we believe in and won't be afraid to use our voice for you in the best interests of the country.

I am immensely grateful to all of our activists, our newly elected representatives and our supporters for standing with us throughout the lifetime of the 33rd Dáil. As we look into the 34th, I am confident that 'Team Common Sense' will challenge the political establishment like never before.

The is a wave of support coming towards Aontú at the doors. Opinion polls are showing arise in our support. More and more people are hearing our message. For the first time, there is an Aontú candidate running in every constituency, giving every citizen the opportunity to vote Aontú #1.

In many constituencies the last seat will be between the government and the Aontú candidate. Don't spread your vote so thin over independents and microorganisations that the government candidate still slips through. Concentrate your vote on the one party that is listening to you.

The government is wasting your money. Do not waste your vote. I am asking you to vote Aontú #1.

Le gach deá ghuí,

Peadar Tóibín TD Leader of Aontú

Our

Common Sense

Housing Policy

8.1%

100,000

increase in rent for new tenants

empty homes

9.843

adults who are homeless

68%

of 18-34 year olds are living in their parents’ home

4,561

children who are homeless

4

Ireland has the 4th highest number of homeless people in Europe

Our Housing Priorities

· Aontú in government will provide 8,000 vacant home grants of up to €70,000 each costing the exchequer €560m a year. Aontú will significantly reduce the bureaucracy and red tape surrounding the drawing down of this funding.

· Aontú will provide a similar grant of up to €30,000 for refurbishment of above the shops accommodation. This will cost for €60m. We will reduce the regulation that is stopping so many people living in the centre of towns.

· We will build 15,000 social and affordable homes a year for the life of the next Dáil.

· We will introduce a no-fault eviction ban for tenants.

· Aontú will zero rate construction materials for the period of the next Dáil to lower the cost of building homes.

· We will introduce Operation Shamrock - we will bring construction workers home. Aontú will build accommodation for returning workers in a speedy fashion under Class 17 of the Exempt Development Regulations. This would cut down the time of build radically. It would cost €350m.

The housing crisis has defined the last decade of Irish politics and threatens to define the future of our nation for years to come. Up to a million people are being forced to live in misery due to mortgage distress, homelessness, waiting lists of many years and/or grossly unaffordable rents and mortgages. It has been far too long since any Irish government has lived up to their responsibilities.

The record of at least three successive governments on housing and homelessness in Ireland has been nothing short of shameful.

There are 14,486 people officially registered as homeless in this state. That’s 10,067 adults and 4,419 children are accessing emergency accommodation in Ireland.

This is the equivalent of everyone who lives Killarney, Co. Kerry homeless.

This is equivalent to 180 classrooms of children, homeless in Ireland at the moment. Let that sink in.

These figures are getting worse every day under the FF/FG/Green government.

These figures do not count those who are sleeping rough or those who are sleeping on couches with friends and families.

Empty homes

There are 4,000 empty Local Authority Homes, each empty for on average 8 months. Aontú will turn around empty local authority homes for re-let within 2 months.

The private sector, in contrast, are turning around empty homes within 3 weeks. We will reduce the turn around renovation spec so that properties are turned around in no longer than 1 month.

Local authorities current have enforcement powers in relation to empty homes, such as the power to issue Compulsory Purchase Orders. However, the use of these powers has been of limited use given it does not guarantee a property is brought back into use. We will utilise CPO’s for properties that have been empty for longer than 5 years.

Refurbishment grants are not being managed properly by the Government. The Minister for Housing has confirmed to Aontú that a mere €4.3 million has been spent through the vacant property refurbishment grant since it was launched in July 2022.

According to our research, only five of these are being processed and approved per month. At that rate, it would take 1,600 years to refurbish all empty homes and bring them back into use.

Aontú in government will provide 8,000 vacant home grants of up to €70,000 each costing the exchequer €560m a year. Aontú will significantly reduce the bureaucracy and red tape surrounding the drawing down of this funding.

Aontú will provide a similar grant of up to €30,000 for refurbishment of above the shops accommodation. This will cost for €60m. We will reduce the regulation that is stopping so many people living in the centre of towns.

Social and Affordable Housing

An increase in the supply of housing is the key to resolving the housing crisis. Firstly, the supply of social and affordable housing needs to be increased. In the 30s, the 50s, and the 80s, in tough economic times, social and affordable housing was built at far higher rates.

Last year, the number of people living in homelessness exceeded the number of social housing units built. Out of a target of 9,100 new build social homes, just 8,100 were delivered last year. Last year the target for affordable purchase and cost rental homes was 5,500 homes. 1,500 affordable purchase and cost rental homes were delivered.

· We will build 15,000 social and affordable homes a year for the life of the next Dáil.

· We need to ensure that the Traveller Accommodation Budgets are spent appropriately and fully by each Local Authority.

· Aontú will create, develop and implement an immediate plan to renovate/rejuvenate the interiors of social housing throughout the country.

· Those in rural areas who own land, but cannot afford to build, or whose current housing is run down, should be permitted to sign over a site to the local authority on which a social house can be built and rented back to them.

· Aontú proposes a carrot and stick approach to mandate utilisation of the land – grant funding and vacant house tax to get empty homes in the state back into use.

Rental Crisis

The average rent in Dublin is more than €2,390 a month. Annually this is a full €3,000 more than the before-tax-income of a person working full time on the minimum wage. The HAP Support scheme can’t keep up with the rate of rent increases.

Young couples and families are moving back in with their parents for years to try cobble together a deposit. People are having to live further outside of Dublin to afford a home. This is adding to the urban sprawl, commuting hell and air pollution. Aontú proposes a number of reforms to begin solving the rental crisis:

· Ensure the 2% Rent Pressure Zone (RPZ) cap is adhered to.

· Ease “over shop” accommodation regulation to allow for empty commercial properties to be used to accommodate families.

· We will introduce a no-fault eviction ban for tenants.

When the ban was debated in the Dáil, we argued for the need to offer specific protections against eviction for people who have a disability, or who are suffering from cancer or another severe illness, and also for tenants who are pregnant or who have given birth to a child within the last three years and people aged over 65 years. The reality is that there are many local authorities around the country where there is not a single available emergency homeless accommodation bed.

Government parties voted against our proposal.

Home Ownership and Construction

The Government have destroyed the ambition of millions of people to be able to own their own home. The myth of an affordable home has been the lie that they have built their disastrous housing policy on, whilst thousands of Irish people remain homeless. In 2023, the average cost of a home under the Affordable Housing Fund was €266,869 – anything but affordable.

Successive Governments have and continue to give the impression that they are in control of the number of homes / housing units being built each year. The reality is that since the 20082010 economic crash, the Government has relied almost exclusively on a small pool of private developers and vulture funds to build houses and apartments.

As an example, there are over half a million young people still living in their parents homes. Over the last 10 years, this policy has failed abysmally and will continue to fail unless the Government recognises that they are not in control and decide to directly compete with the current monopoly, who can decide where to build, when to build and charge whatever they can to maximise their profits.

· Aontú will end the eternal regulation change. The current housing Minister has changed building regulation several times. As a result, many builders expect further change which will allow more units to be achieved per site. This has the effect of slowing down the building of houses.

· Aontú want to engage engineers and architects to design housing schemes and invite tenders from house building firms or contractors of all sizes.

· Aontú will seek to re-zone land across the country for housing, and seek to control the cost of units through the public building process.

· Aontú seeks to implement policies which will end the cosy relationship between vulture funds, developers and the government parties. The housing policy of the Irish government should not give a blank cheque to international investors and pit young families against vulture funds.

· Aontú will introduce amendments to EU law to delete advantages that FF/FG give to international investment vehicles which allows them a competitive advantage over families seeking a home.

· Aontú will zero rate construction materials for the period of the next Dáil to lower the cost of building homes.

· Aontú will reduce HBFI rates from 13% to 5% and subsidise the connection fees of utilities for new homes.

This will reduce the cost of building homes and make projects more viable. These proposals would reduce the price of a house by €55,000 homes.

· Aontú will reform and speed up the planning permission process. We will do this by recruiting more planners by providing proper pay and conditions for planners. We will end land bank speculation.

We have already introduced a Bill into the Dail that would end tax advantages for predatory Real Estate Investment Trusts or (REITs). We have also introduced a Bill into the Dáil that would end Air bnb operating in in large towns and cities for an emergency period of 2 years.

Though these priorities, we believe the Government will be competing with, rather than relying on, private developers to meet the country’s housing needs.

Homelessness

There were 400 homeless deaths in Dublin over the last five years. The recording of homeless deaths is confined to Dublin. What does it say about the broken and callous nature of our political system that we cannot even figure out how many have died on the streets of Ireland?

Over €2.1bn has been spent by Local Authorities on services for households experiencing homelessness between 2009-2022. Most of this money has gone to commercial hotels and B&Bs. Our proposal repurposes that funding towards emergency accommodation to be allocated to housing associations and local authorities.

· Aontú will ensure that there is a standardised reporting of homeless deaths in each county.

· Aontú will ensure better communication between various state entities and wrap around supports for homeless people in terms of the prison service, social work, mental health and addiction services.

Tenants’ Rights

Due to the dysfunction within the market and the lack of tenants’ rights within the law, many tenants are living in poor conditions, paying exorbitant rents and suffering due to the precarious nature of contracts. Indeed, most of the people presenting as homeless is coming from the private rental sector. A number of reforms in this sector will stem this human tide.

Many small Landlords around the country have found themselves landlords by circumstance, with high mortgages and difficulties with a minority of tenants who do not fulfil their contracts or their obligations.

· Greater security of tenure must be provided. Tenancies of indefinite duration must be provided for.

· The grounds of sale should be removed from the Residential Tenancies Act. “Buy to Let” landlords who achieved tax breaks from the state should be prevented from issuing vacant possession “Notices to Quit”.

· We need the State to increase the number purchases of ‘tenants in situ’ house sales in Ireland.

· It should be made easier to remove tenants who wilfully damage property or do not live up to their agreed tenancy agreement.

Infrastructural Development

Human resources and Infrastructure are key to the provision of homes. This government has completely ignored the provision of infrastructure over the last 10 years. For the majority of the last 10 years Ireland has been second last in the EU for expenditure on infrastructure as a result tens of thousands of home builds are blocked for the want of water and waste water.

· Aontú in government would invest €3.5bn in the provision of clean and wastewater next year making it possible to build tens of thousands of new homes.

Operation Shamrock

There are hundreds of thousands of construction workers building houses at the moment. The problem is up to half of these are building houses in Australia and Canada.

Aontú will launch Operation Shamrock to attract key Irish construction workers who have moved abroad to come home. This will include a relocation package of €5,000 in vouchers to spend on flights, accommodation etc for workers who have left Ireland more than 2 years ago.

We would also provide a €10,000 tax credit for these specific workers spread over 3 years. The worker would have to remain within the Irish state working in the sector for 4 years after moving home. For 10,000 staff this would cost €100m.

Aontú will build accommodation for returning workers in a speedy fashion under Class 17 of the Exempt Development Regulations. This would cut down the time of build radically. It would cost €350m.

Aontú will also improve workforce planning in radically increase the number of construction apprentices from 1,500 a year to 3,000 a year.

Student Accommodation

Right now, in Ireland students are crying out for accommodation. Student towns and cities have hostels full of students, or students commuting long distances from the home places. This in untenable. We’ve seen situations where students are handing out leaflets on main streets looking for accommodation.

· Aontú seek to end the interference of the EU on the ability of the Irish Government to regulate Air BnB’s. At present students are living in hostels while tourists are in houses right across the country. We will ensure than no vacant property in a student town is being used as an Air BnB, we will ban them by way of legislation.

· Aontú will ensure that basic, affordable, non-extravagant student accommodation is made available for students on campus, and we will ensure value for money in this process.

Defective Blocks

We have a crisis of defective buildings all across the country, and all due to decisions not to enforce standards in the building industry, a clear case of negligence on the part of our political classes and permanent government.

While all leave families and family businesses facing unaffordable costs, for which the government must accept liability, the most dishonest of these is where the government actually took time in the Dáil to enact regulations, pretending to the public that they could rely on those regulations, and then chose not to actually provide the resources to do the work.

This is the case with substandard building materials which have been found across at least 16 counties of Ireland.

The government, political and permanent, has done its utmost to run away from this problem, such as making deliberate decisions not to do full scientific laboratory investigations.

This has resulted in thousands young families and others, already burdened with expensive mortgages, facing complete rebuilding of their homes when these billions in total costs could have been avoided for less than the cost of new windows for one house.

It has taken the private initiative of the victims themselves to investigate and find the source of the problem and the authorities are still working on updating regulations, even though the problem is known and has been acted upon in many other countries.

The proper resources have still not been provided to enforce even the current regulations, with the excuse from the Housing Minister that there will be new building quality legislation next year. But he has given no guarantee that there will actually be a budget for enforcement of these new regulations either.

We support 100% redress.

Fire certification of apartment blocks remains a function of the private sector, where the certifier is paid by the developer. While we may have some confidence in the professional liability of the certifiers, we believe that this should be a function of a properly resourced public buildings control office, as is the case in other countries.

Aontú has signed up to the People’s Document of the Donegal Mica Action Group, which lays out what is required for all victims throughout the country and what is required to stop problems like this now and in the future.

While the financial and psychological harms to home-owning families are front and centre, this failure of governance has caused immense harm to community buildings, accommodation for renters, family farms and businesses and these need to be addressed as well.

100% Redress for the financial costs is the starting point along with technical and psychological support for victims who are not familiar with the technical issues and have to face the terrible psychological burden of losing their forever homes. The operation of the current scheme represents a hostile environment for victims, with the government more concerned to evade responsibility than to help victims.

We believe that the necessary resources are not available in local councils or in the regional health service and these extra resources must be made available by central government to support victims locally in every stage from suspect building through to final completion of any rebuild.

The level of necessary remediation must be based on the scientific evidence and not on direction from Merrion Street. In the case of defective blocks and defective aggregate in foundations, where international experts say total demolition and rebuild is the proper option, then that must be the case.

There needs to be flexibility in planning to allow temporary accommodation on site where needed, or to downsize or change building technology where this can speed up building or reduce costs.

Where aggregates or concrete products need to be used, the local council must be provided with full laboratory resources to ensure that all known deleterious materials, whether or not included in the relevant standards/regulations, are excluded. Failure to do this could mean that we just have the same problem again in a few years’ time.

Our

Common Sense

Health Policy

700,000

people on waiting lists

81%

increase in children waiting to access CAMHS

264

children STILL waiting on scoliosis treatment

Our Health Priorities

· Aontú seeks to change the funding of the health service to a patient engagement model. Where a patient receives an operation, a treatment, an engagement or a consultation, the state will pay the provider.

· Aontú would impose a recruitment freeze for admin and management. The non replacement of 600 WTE in this sector would save the HSE €30m.

· The cost of employing an extra nurse/midwife in the Irish public health sector into the future is approximately €76,148 per annum. 3,500 new nurses and midwives would cost €259m

· Health workers will be included in Operation Shamrock, seeking to bring nurses, consultants and other healthcare workers home with a return package.

· Aontú is opposed to the closure of further EDs including Navan ED and will seek an Emergency Department in the Mid West to take pressure off University Hospital Limerick.

· Aontú would allocate an additional in €10 million in funding to establish 12 additional CAMHS teams.

· The existing provision of specialist mental health staff in hospital A&Es, prisons and on-campus medical centres in universities needs to be expanded, and should include mental health nursing cover available to respond to mental health challenges and crises as they arise. The cost of this additional cover is estimated to be approximately €4 million.

· Aontú seek to employ an additional 400 Consultants next year at a cost of €88m.

Our health service is overmanaged, under resourced and crippled with Government red tape and regulation. Only recently did we have a HSE recruitment freeze. whilst nurses and doctors have been crying out for help with Accident and Emergency departments on their knees.

In a modern European country, the sight of ambulances waiting to unload sick patients into hospitals is a disgrace. Primary care services are on the brink of collapse, and it is becoming increasingly difficult to get an appointment with your GP. Mental health services, when they are available, are an Eircode lottery, especially CAMH services. Aontú will protect essential services and invest in the long-term viability of our health service.

Unscheduled Care

Aontú have uncovered some very concerning statistics through Parliamentary Questions and Freedom of Information Requests in relation to the situation in our hospitals. For example, from 2017 to 2022 some 482,844 people left the Emergency Department around Ireland without being seen.

From 2019 until the end of the first quarter of 2024 12,847 nurses left their jobs. We know that during the first six months of this year there was a recruitment freeze on nurses in our hospitals, with many nurses effectively locked out of working in our health service.

Aontú is opposed to the closure of further EDs including Navan ED and will seek an Emergency Department in the Mid West to take pressure off University Hospital Limerick.

Mental Health Services

The under-resourcing of CAMHS has become a national scandal, with over 4,361 on waiting lists. This is particularly concerning as the delay in treatment of mental illness is associated with poorer long-term outcomes.

· Aontú will allocate an additional in €10 million in funding to establish 12 additional CAMHS teams.

· The existing provision for specialist mental health staff in hospital A&Es, prisons and on-campus medical centres in universities needs to be expanded, and should include out of hours mental health nursing cover to respond to mental health challenges and crises as they arise. The cost of this additional cover is estimated to be approximately €4 million.

· Aontú aims to hire 40 additional specialist nurses in the areas of mental health, intellectual disability and suicide prevention. These nurses would help to boost existing frontline staff and be transferred to hospitals and centres where they are most needed.

Family Carers

Aontú brought two motions to the Dáil in the past year seeking the abolition of the means test for the carers’ allowance. We were the only political party in the Dáil to advocate a No vote in the recent Care Referendum, in which the government sought to eviscerate carers by reducing their constitutional grounds for seeking economic support from the State.

Over a half a million people in Ireland provide regular unpaid care to family members or loved ones. Those who provide care within the home should be paid for the work they are doing and should not be penalised based on their spouse’s income rates.

· Aontú seeks an abolition of the means test for the carers’ allowance.

· Aontú wants better access to respite services and increased weeks of respite for those in receipt of round-the-clock care, to alleviate the pressures on family carers.

· Aontú are advocating for more regulated and public home care hours to be provided by the State, rather than agencies, so that people can receive care in their own homes and allow the family carer a daily break from their work.

Ambulance Service

Aontú has uncovered the fact that the number of people who were dead by the time an ambulance reached them has increased by 70% since 2016.

Correspondence from the Director of the National Ambulance Service to Aontú also shows that in 2016 some 15,395 or 8% of ambulances took longer than one hour to handover a patient in a hospital. By 2022 this figure had risen to 94,639 - 38% of ambulances waited longer than an hour to handover a patient in a hospital before being dispatched on the next call.

The delay in discharging a patient at the hospital is having an impact on response times. One of the biggest reasons for the delays in dispatch or discharging on the hospital grounds is the scarcity of trolleys in ED departments.

It often happens that when a patient is transported from the ambulance into the hospital on an ambulance trolley, they are left waiting in ED on the ambulance trolley, and thus the ambulance has to wait until an alternative trolley is freed up.

· Aontú will increase the number of staff employed by the National Ambulance Service, and the number of ambulance vehicles available within the health service in line with population growth.

· Aontú will ensure that each emergency department has a bank of ambulance trollies in storage to ensure that no ambulance is needlessly held up at hospitals due to a scarcity of trollies. Quicker deployment and handover will save lives.

Recruitment

It is a national scandal that in the middle of the crisis in health, the HSE imposed a recruitment freeze/embargo on nurses in our hospitals. This had the effect of locking qualified nurses, particularly those returning from abroad, out of our health service.

One of the many damaging consequences of austerity on our healthcare system was the migration of thousands of health professionals. The effects are still evident on service provision, difficulties in retaining existing staff and attracting much needed consultant and specialist staff.

There has been a breakdown of trust in relation to contractual arrangements, which was evidenced by the first strike by our nursing profession in more than a generation. Aontú believes that rebuilding the health system requires rebuilding trust between government and the health professions.

Staff numbers in Ireland's acute public hospitals should increase by 15,500 over the next 13 years, according to a report by the ERSI into the healthcare system. We need more nurses, doctors, physiotherapists, dieticians and occupational therapists.

Out of 700 doctors who graduated last year 400 of them emigrated. Nurses are voting with their feet and are emigration in large numbers every year

To recruit staff we need to improve wages, terms and conditions. We also need to bring Irish Doctors and Nurses home from Australia and Canada. To do this Aontú will launch Operation Shamrock to attract key Irish workers who have moved abroad to come home.

The subject of the first round of Operation Shamrock will be Doctors, Nurses and Construction workers.

Aontú Parliamentary Questions have found out that over half of all undergraduate medical students in Irish universities are from outside the EU. They pay 130,000 for their fees.

This means that many of these people will be lost to the Irish health service in the future. We want to significantly increase the college places for Irish medical students.

The cost of employing an extra nurse/midwife in the Irish public health sector into the future is approximately €76,148 per annum. 3,500 new nurses and midwives would cost €259m

· Aontú seeks to change the funding of the health service to a patient engagement model. Where a patient receives an operation, a treatment, an engagement or a consultation, the state will pay the provider. We believe that this will increase the flow of government expenditure to the front line and reduce the layers of management staff within the health service.

·35,000 management and administrative staff work within the HSE. This means that 1 in 4 staff within the HSE works in management and administration. Aontú will aim to increase the number of frontline staff and reduce the number of admin and management staff. The latter will be achieved through natural retirement. It is estimated that 600 people retire from Management and Administration each year within the HSE. With a recruitment freeze for admin and management, the non replacement of 600 WTE in this sector would save the HSE €30m.

· Aontú will reduce the use of agency staff in the HSE by 20% for each of the next 5 years. This will save €123m next year.

· Aontú seeks to employ an additional 400 Consultants next year at a cost of €88m

Patient safety

Last year there were 107,000 adverse incidents in the health service. Over the last 5 years 3,140 people have lost their lives in hospitals due to adverse incidents. €2.5 billion has been paid out in compensation for adverse incidents in hospitals in 10 years. No one has been held to account.

The Aoife Johnston case is just one heartbreaking example. This is happening because of overcrowding, and no one has ever been held to account. The cost of the cyber-attack on the HSE is over €100m and another €657 million on security upgrades.

The human cost, in terms of hundreds of thousands of very ill people not getting the treatment that they need is colossal. We don't know how many people have died or suffered significant morbidity as a result.

Regarding Cervical Check, the government promised that no woman would have to go to court to achieve justice for the damage done by Cervical Check. The former Taoiseach even made an apology in front of the Dáil. Yet since then, 400 women have had to go to court to take cases. Incredibly 85% of Cervical Samples are still being sent abroad. No one held to account.

General Practice

GPs interact with every individual and every family. They should be at the heart of a responsive, proactive and cost-effective health system. Aontú believes GP’s should be incentivized to offer a wider range of services, either directly or through an Integrated Group Practice. It is clear that with increased investment in facilities and staff, GP’s can offer a much wider set of services, from minor surgical procedures to mental health, if facilities and space are provided.

This makes sense, both in terms of patient-friendly delivery of care and also relieving pressures on the health system. Pharmacists must also have a greater role in the delivery of healthcare to citizens.

There are not enough GPs in Ireland to meet patient numbers. The crisis is particularly acute in rural Ireland. It is creating a risk to life and health in many parts of the country.

There are only 4,300 GPs in Ireland. We are currently 2,000 doctors shy of what is a safe number and 1,000 doctors will retire over the next 5 years.

Last year 442 Irish doctors left to work abroad; more than half of the 725 doctors that graduated the previous year.

Thousands of people cant get on to a doctors list and those who can are now waiting up to 2 weeks for an appointment. This is pushing people in greater numbers into A&E departments, further clogging hospitals.

· Aontú will press for 10% of the current health budget being assigned to the development and delivery of Primary Care in communities.

While there has been some increase in college places and some doctors have come from abroad, we are no where near fixing this problem. Between population growth, an older population, doctor retirements and young Irish doctors emigrating the issue is getting worse. When will this government see beyond the M50 and stem the fall in General Practitioners.

The dearth of GPs in rural Ireland has to have a material effect on health and life expectancy. The Government is so Dublin-based that they don't even recognise the problem.

Healthcare in rural communities

More than two out of three GPs in rural Ireland are not taking on new patients and some have waiting times of up to two weeks for an appointment, a study by the Irish Independent has shown.

Just 32pc of practices outside of the country's main cities are open to taking on new patients, compared with almost half of urban practices, reflecting a clear divide in access. While exceptions can be made, many practices said they were not in the position to take on new patients unless they fell within their catchment area or fit other criteria, with decisions made on a case-by-case basis by the GP.

The eastern region is the worst affected, with the vast majority of practices contacted revealing they are currently not accepting patients. Wicklow and Wexford practices appear the worst affected by full patient lists.

Information Communication Technology

The HSE has not embraced Information Communications Technology (ICT) to the necessary levels. The Health Service needs to have the ability to manage all aspects of the delivery of healthcare in a digital environment. One of the oldest truisms of management is; what can’t be measured cannot be (effectively) managed, and this remains of relevance to Healthcare. This includes staffing and administration, the digitising and transferability of patient records electronically across different domains and developing the capability to align to rapidly evolving E-medicine.

Our

Common Sense

Immigration Policy

Preface

The lack of planning, consistency, sustainability, and community consultation by the Government on its immigration policies has created chaos.

It was Aontú who first raised the massive problems in the government approach. We have been challenging the government ever since. Until opinion polls started to show that 70% of the Irish people were deeply uncomfortable with the government’s policy, the government was oblivious to what was happening.

Aontú Parliamentary Questions have shown that it has been taking years for the first asylum decision to be made for thousands of applicants. It was taking up to 10 years for an asylum applicant to exhaust all of the appeals before a final decision is made.

Another Aontú Parliamentary Question has shown that last year, there were 1,792 deportation orders made. Shockingly the government only enforced 98 of these. That’s 5% of all deportation orders being enforced. There were 648 voluntary deportations, yet the government cannot confirm if these people left the country.

What is the point of having a system that is supposed to differentiate between people who need help and those who don’t and then at the end of the process both groups have the same outcomes and stay in Ireland.

Thousands of people are arriving in Ireland who have destroyed their travel documents. This makes it much more difficult to process asylum applications. Aontú believe that a person who has purposefully destroyed their travel documents should not be given leave to land.

76% of people applying for asylum in Ireland don’t do it at the airports or the ports but at the International Protection Office. The vast majority have come from Britain through the north of Ireland. Aontú asked the Minister for Justice, how many are coming through this route. The Minister told us she did not know. The Minister told us that applicants are not asked how they came into the country.

It’s outrageous that the Minister for Justice is not even asking the relevant questions. Aontú seek an Irish sea border at the airports and ferry ports in the North of Ireland so that the Island is treated as a unit in terms of the asylum process. Aontú are advocating for the creation of a single Border Agency that will be responsible for the management of applications, enforcement of decisions, accommodation, community consultation and border security.

Aontú is a party of self-determination. We oppose the EU Migration Pact which will erode the ability of domestic governments to manage their immigration systems and adapt to any changes in migration.

Aontú seek a strict and speedy immigration system that differentiates between those who need help, those who are fleeing war and violence, and those who don’t. There are good people living in Ireland who have come from other countries doing important and valuable work. Aontú believes in equality and respect for all those who are legally contributing to Irish society.

1

New Irish Border Agency

We will create a new Border Agency. It will take over responsibility for border control, processing of applications and enforcement. Currently only a few hundred people are involved in managing our border systems and they are operating across two different government departments and in four different guises – the Garda National Immigration Bureau, the International Protection Office, The Border Management Unit and the International Protection Procurement Service.

As an example, there are currently only 31 staff in the International Protection Procurement Service which is charged with finding accommodation for what will be 20,000 IPAS applicants by the end of 2024 – that is 1 member of staff for 709 individuals which is clearly not efficient or sustainable.

Aontú have looked extensively at other EU countries of similar size to determine a better way forward. Lithuania, a country of similar population and size, have an integrated border force of over 4,000 staff – our investment in a new Border Agency will be of the same magnitude.

2

Re-instate Planning Laws

We will re-instate the application of planning laws for asylum accommodation. Currently, no planning is required for IPAS accommodation – we have former industrial complexes, hotels and other buildings being automatically converted to house migrants without any input from the local population.

If the building of homes, business premises or any other community facility must run the gauntlet of planning processes, then not only should this apply to asylum accommodation, but the public must also be able to have their say on those applications.

Aontú will end the exemption for asylum accommodation from planning law.

3

A Community Dividend

Where communities agree to host migrants, there must be a community dividend. The Government set aside millions of euros for this purpose, yet allocated only a small amount.

If a town or village agree to an increase in their population, the Government must provide immediate, sustainable investment in public services such as schools, healthcare and housing so that not only can local services cope with more demand, but that those who wish to create conflict with others on the basis of pressure on public services will have no fertile ground on which to spread disharmony.

4

Applications determined in 6 months

We will ensure that every application for asylum is processed within 6 months. This will be achieved through the new Border Agency which will be appropriately staffed. We have had asylum applicants wait up to ten years for their applications to be determined, and this must end.

Aontú will create a new court and properly resource it to decide on asylum applications. Where the new court refuse an appeal, the applicant must be subject to enforced deportation.

For several years and indeed recently, the system overseen by the Government has made no difference in the outcome of applications – those who were granted asylum were able to stay alongside those who had their applications refused because agencies were not forced to act on implementing rules that were already in place.

5

End the destruction of documents

The situation where some migrants destroy their travel documents to prevent the lawful processing of any asylum application or deportation is in flagrant breach of Irish and European law.

We are clear, where an applicant deliberately destroys or loses travel documents, they will be refused permission to land. There have been instances where people have come to this country, destroyed their travel documents and rather than being held as is mandated in Irish law, they are released from their port of entry and are able to make their way to claim asylum at the IPAS centre in Dublin. There are no checks as to where these people then go.

We know that the vast majority of those entering the country do so having first been in another European country. Their details are recorded by the EU Frontex system and so Irish authorities will know from where someone has come from should they destroy their travel documents.

That information is currently underutilised, and we want to ensure that anyone who comes to this country with intentions to frustrate our lawful processes as their very first act, will not be allowed to remain.

6

No entry for criminals

The Government are not checking well-established international databases for the criminal background of anyone entering the country – a major scandal uncovered by Aontú.

We will not permit the entry into the country of anyone with a criminal record. Living in Ireland is a privilege, one which will not be extended to those who have not respected the laws either in their home country or in another in which they have lived.

7

Enforcing deportations

Voluntary deportation is a myth perpetuated by this Government.

After a long asylum process where the State has spent large amounts of public resources, there is no difference to the outcome of an asylum application – if someone is refused the right to remain, they can simply ignore the outcome as the Gardaí will not seek to remove them. This must end.

Under the new Border Agency, appropriate numbers of staff will be dedicated to enforcing deportation orders and seeing those who have been ordered from the State physically leave.

8

Fairness in allocation of resources

This Government has created a situation whereby some people who have entered the country have been given priority in areas like accommodation, health or transport.

We will ensure that non-citizens will no longer be prioritised over Irish citizens for any public service. The idea that modular homes can be provided for some coming to the country whilst refused to Irish people and their families who are homeless is not reconcilable. The government’s policy is creating deep anger and division.

There should be no circumstances whereby resources are prioritised for those entering the country for any reason, over those who have lived here their whole lives and have paid the taxes that sustain such services. Aontú will demand this be enshrined in law.

9

An Irish Sea Border

We will create an Irish Sea Border for people. The Government has failed in its most basic border protection duty – to know where people are entering the State from.

By establishing a border in the Irish Sea for the movement of people, we can manage the flow of people either through ports or through the land border with the north of Ireland.

Through Aontú’s research, we forced the Minister to admit the vast majority of those entering the State were coming from the north of Ireland. It should also be noted that the benefits of the Common Travel Area are for British and Irish citizens only.

If we can implement a system for goods in line with international law, we believe this can be implemented in line with the Common Travel Area, the mechanics of which already allow for measures such as inspections and related migration action.

It has been argued that this measure would affect the Common Travel Area, however, there are already preventative, and intelligence led checks on the land border as well as a specific Irish-British operations called Operation Gull which aims to intercept and remove migrants who use this route to enter illegally. In Ireland, relevant activities are sometimes called Operation Sonnet.

In theory, the CTA allows British and Irish travellers to enter both jurisdictions without immigration control or a passport, however, it is increasingly common practice to require some form of government-issued ID or a passport to travel by air or sea between the two.

Indeed, the High Court has outlined in Pachero & Anor v MJE & Ors [2011] IEHC 491, 29 December 2011, para 18:

“While in theory both Irish and British citizens are entitled to arrive here free from immigration control by virtue of the common travel area, increasingly in practice such passengers who arrive by air from the United Kingdom are required to produce their passports (or, at least, some other form of acceptable identity document) in order to prove to immigration officers that they are either Irish or British citizens who can avail of the common travel area.”

10

Oversight of State resources

Aontú has fought extensively to bring information about our migration system to the public. This is in stark contrast to the actions of the Government parties who have sought to limit the amount of information the public had access to in order to conceal their scandalous failures.

Going forward, Aontú will seek the relevant Minister to lay before the Dáil a report that will comprehensively outline the resources and finance being used in the system each year so that Irish taxpayers can hold their elected representatives to account.

Whilst this may seem an uncontroversial demand, up until now the Dáil has only voted on Departmental Accounts which cover spending that may be accrued, whereas there have been numerous instances of several tens of millions of euro being spent on the IPAS system in particular without the Oireachtas having been advised or support sought.

Our

Common Sense

Cost of Living Policy

55%

of the cost of a litre of petrol is tax

€5.88

added to a 40kg bag of coal by Carbon Tax

70%

of parents said they sometimes or always worry about not being able to provide their children with daily essentials*

€80

a week on groceries in 2021

€1,000

would cost this much more now per year

*Barnardos Cost of Living Report, May 2024

Our Cost-of-Living Priorities

Aontú will reverse the last two Excise increases on petrol and diesel and pause all carbon tax increases until the cost of living crisis subsides.

· We will commit to ensuring no further toll increases over the next three years.

Zero rate Electricity on VAT while electricity prices remain high. This will cost of €195,000,000 a year.

The Cost-Of-Living crisis has caused untold hardships to many ordinary people in the country. Ever since the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the blocking of the Suez Canal, prices appear to be going up for almost every product.

Toll Charges

Since 2020 a total of €1.5 Billion has been collected at toll bridges around the country, according to figures released to Aontú under the Freedom of Information Act. Last year alone, nearly €390 million euro was collected. Across the country tolls brought in €46 million more last year than the previous year. On the back of that increase in revenue there can be no logical argument for a further increase in charges, yet each year the charges are being increased. Ireland is becoming a commuter hell due to a lack of regional investment - large numbers of people in Meath, Louth, Kildare, and Wicklow and even further afield are forced to drive to Dublin for work each day. They're spending hours in traffic, paying an enormous price for petrol, tolls, parking, and the added costs of childcare due to the length of their commute. This is not tenable. Aontú in Government will:

· Commit to ensuring no further toll increases over the next three years.

· Begin the process of purchasing toll bridges to ensure that government controls charges, and that any excess money brought in (which is beyond what is required to maintain the roads) will be used for the upkeep and maintenance of primary and secondary roads across the country.

· Scrutinise the accounts of the private operators with whom the government are in partnership.

Cost of Fuel

According to data released to Aontú the government collected €3.8 Billion in tax on fuel last year, the highest amount collected in any year over the past decade. €107 million was derived from Carbon Tax on Natural Gas – which is the highest amount on record. €2.4 Billion of it came from Mineral Oil Tax, while €19 Million came from Solid Fuel Carbon Tax and €4.2 Million from electricity tax.

This is an astronomical amount of money collected from tax on fuel. The government, ever since the Russian invasion of Ukraine, have been at pains to try and convince the public that they’re doing everything they can to tackle and reduce the cost of fuel. The reality presented in these figures is that the government are actually cashing in on the rise in price and have taken in more tax than ever before.

Given that these figures show that the tax intake isn’t taking a hit in relation to fuel, and is actually rising steadily, the government should halt the excise duty increases and work to reduce the tax rate given the enormous burden on families, farmers and commuters around the country. Aontú in government would:

· Aontú will reverse the last Excise increases on petrol and diesel.

· Stall the carbon tax rises, until such time as the fuel price has consistently dropped and reverse the last rise.

Electricity prices

Irish consumers pay €500 more on average than any other citizens in Europe. This crippling additional cost has pushed households into limiting their electricity use. Despite a credit being applied by the 2025 Budget, families will not feel a relief as the Public Service Obligation Levy and the Carbon Tax will wipe out any benefit.

The Greens in Government have sought to hoodwink the public into thinking that they are actually benefitting from certain measures whilst actually cutting them back. An example, only recently has Electric Ireland cut the rate of payment to homeowners who use solar panels to sell power back to the grid.

Childcare

Roderic O'Gorman has spoken about the vision for public delivery of childcare.

Minister Roderic O Gorman spoke about the numbers of services that are opening and closing are not accurate. There are services on the list still that are closed for 3 and 4 years.

Aontú cannot overstate the seriousness of the crisis is. In 2019 there were 77 net closures. In 2020 there were 70 net closures. In 2021 there were net 62 services that closed. Last year there were well over 80 net closures of services.

The debate on childcare and early years learning today is incredibly bizarre. We are on the precipice of collapse in the Smaller Childcare and ECCE sector and most of the TDs speaking on the issues from the government and the opposition side have failed to mention the elephant in the room.

Its not surprising in many ways has its often the case this Dáil is a bubble. So much of the debate there ignores the realities of the lives of the people.

Not only are these closures disasters for the providers. They have lost years of effort, personal investment and blood seat and tears. But its also meant that many hundreds of staff have lost their jobs. Above all of this, it has deleted the availability of Early Years Education and childcare on many towns and villages throughout the country.

The most frustrating element of this is, its not by accident this has happened. The Minister has been told week after week that his actions are the cause of this damage.

We commend first of all the workers and the providers that deliver to us a superb Early Years Education and Childcare Services in this country.

We want to also want to commend the Early Years Education and all the providers and staff that went on strike last a number of times.

Despite the closure, the job losses. Minister Roderic O Gorman has stated that that the strike action was not necessary.

It's a bit rich for a Minister who is on a salary of €183,000 a year to tell providers and staff who are on less than the minimum wage that their strike is not necessary.

This wasn't the first time that these workers have had to go on strike indeed they have been campaigning for the last 4 years to ensure that their sector is viable and can pay decent wages. This has been a long and arduous campaign. A campaign that should have never had happened.

The critical element to all of this is that the Minister is for sure cutting the cost of child care but he is doing so by making hundreds of providers non viable. The Minister's policy is closing down childcare provides. What is the logic of reducing the cost of child care if parents cant get the childcare because it has been closed down.

Child care providers are not alone. The same situation has happened with the Nursing Homes today. Nursing Homes are closing down because the government are refusing to provide the necessary funding.

The same is happening with the Children in state care. There is such as crisis in the provision of care in this sector that the sate is now using care companies that are not vetted and are not regulated. This is leaving children exposed to sexual exploitation.

The caring professions are simply not a priority by the state. We are placing the most precious people in our lives, our children and our parents into care. Yet the state will not do right to the people who care for these people.

The Minister for Children states that the sector is discommoding parents. The Minister's stubbornness is discommoding parents. 11,000 parents have signed a petition in support of the Childcare Sector and their battle with the Minister.

His actions are actively closing businesses down especially In rural Ireland. Not only are these businesses being damaged, but whole swathes of Ireland will be without any childcare or ECCE service. The minister prides himself of being a minister of equality yet is actions are wrecking massive damage in a sector where women are the owners. I urge the Minister to meet with the sector with a real proposal that will allow these businesses survive the economic crisis.

Our

Common Sense

Enterprise Policy

Our Enterprise Priorities

· Aontú will mandate the ESB, which is making extraordinarily high profits, to reduce their profit levels and lower the cost of electricity.

· Aontú will invest €3.5bn in water and wastewater infrastructure.

· Aontú will provide an addition €1.25bn in additional investment to strengthen our national grid and develop offshore grid infrastructure.

· Aontú will reduce VAT for hospitality to 9% special VAT rate which would cost up to €764m a year.

· Aontú will direct the IDA and Enterprise Ireland to further promote regional towns and cities in terms of new business projects. Aontú also seeks to build a new international class city on the west coast of Ireland.

· Aontú seeks to reduce excise on alcohol sold in pubs and restaurants in Ireland by 10c a unit. This will increase footfall for the hospitality sector.

Aontú supports Indigenous Business

Aontú is a pro enterprise party. Enterprise is the spark in the Irish economy that provides prosperity and much needed jobs. Aontú supports Foreign Direct Investment and will work to ensure that the conditions necessary for FDI to flourish exist in Ireland.

We do believe that the Irish government are weak on indigenous enterprise.

Indigenous enterprise is the poor relation of the Irish government’s enterprise policy. This over dependence of FDI has left our country exposed to international factors.

FDI is mobile. Indigenous enterprise is sticker. FDI can and will move more readily on the basis of international factors. The Irish government has become very dependent on FDI corporation taxes. This leaves Ireland overly exposed as FDI may move on the basis decisions on labour costs, corporation taxes and the incoming US government.

Better Integration of FDI and Indigenous Enterprise

Aontú is clear that the links between FDI aided companies and Irish enterprises could and must be significantly enhanced. We will advocate strongly for policies that strengthen these links, both operationally and strategically.

Challenges for Irish Businesses

Irish businesses of all sizes have had to content with a range of challenges over the last number of years - Covid, energy prices and spiralling costs. Aontú want to ensure that the environment for business to flourish and maintain employment levels is reduced of red tape, where incentives are targeted and where our skill base remains competitive.

Solutions

Most Irish businesses simply seek competitive inputs costs, well education staff, good transport and ICT infrastructure, a balanced regulatory system and fair government supports. In most of these areas the government has let down the people.

Energy prices

Ireland has amongst the highest costs for electricity in Europe and research published by BusinessEurope in July found Ireland’s energy prices over the coming years could be significantly higher than in other European countries.

·Aontú will mandate the ESB, which is making extraordinarily high profits, to reduce their profit levels and lower the cost of electricity.

·Aontú will decouple the price of electricity from the price gas.

·Aontú will increase competition the energy market.

·Aontú will reverse the last two Excise increases on petrol and diesel and pause all carbon tax increases until the cost of living crisis subsides.

· Aontú will provide a €500m fund over 5 years to help Irish enterprise become more energy efficient.

We are committed to the upgrade of the national grid and the continued interconnection projects, but we want to see a focus being brought to offshore and onshore renewable energy solutions and storage which can be utilised to lower domestic and business energy costs. This will require a review of regulation which we will deliver within the first year of Government. Aontú is also mindful of the need community consent in these projects.

Infrastructure

We know that water infrastructure and transport gridlock, particularly in greater Dublin, is causing delays in business plans for expansion. Infrastructure projects such as Metro North, the Navan to Dublin Rail Line, the Western Rail Corridor remain bogged down in regulation and process despite having cost millions of euro.

· Aontú will set up a commission to investigate the reform of the whole infrastructure planning and building process to reduce the time, regulation and expense of building infrastructural projects in Ireland.

· Aontú will invest €3.5bn in water and wastewater infrastructure.

· Aontú will provide an addition €1.25bn in additional investment to strengthen our national grid and develop offshore grid infrastructure.

· supported by an additional Exchequer contribution of €750 million

Housing infrastructure

Given the failure of government parties to adequately grapple the issue of home building over the last four years, employers such as Ryanair, Supermac and Ashford Castle have been forced to build accommodation for their staff.

We are determined through our housing policy to ensure that housing is available for workers across the country in a reformed system that can build properties as quickly and efficiently as possible.

· Aontú will create the conditions through public and private construction to ensure that there will be 60,000 homes built each year from 2026.

· The National Broadband Plan will receive €400 million to accelerate the roll-out of Ireland’s high speed broadband network ·Operation Shamrock to Bring our young people Home.

Increased Cost of Business (ICOB) grant

Created as part of Budget 2024, the ICOB grant was funded to the tune of €257m and was based on 2023 commercial rates bills. This scheme did not take into account crucial energy costs, and we are proposing that the fund be increased to €450m with a portion of any grant based on the annual cost of electricity in the previous twelve months.

Microfinance Ireland

We recognise the work of MFI and its support for small and growing businesses across the country. Aontú wishes to see the expansion of all loan schemes with a reduction in the interest rate to 3% across the board.

Dublin Airport

Aontú will increase the passenger cap on Dublin Airport in line with increased use at Cork, Knock and Shannon airports. Crucially will also invest in Shannon, Cork and Knock airports to improve connectivity from these airports. We will also work alongside freight carriers to expand tonnage from 80m to 100m tonnes annually.

Hospitality and VAT

Aontú was a key supporter of reducing VAT for hospitality to 9% special VAT rate which would cost up to €764m a year. We were the first party to proposed separating out restaurants and pubs from large hotels for the purpose of this reduction. It is imperative that smaller business are able to access assistance at a time when costs are rising alongside staffing costs.

Aontú seeks to reduce excise on alcohol sold in pubs and restaurants in Ireland by 10c a unit. This will increase footfall for the hospitality sector. The famed Irish pub is becoming an endangered species. Alcohol consumed on site is healthier than alcohol consumed at home as there is more human interaction and more supervision of quantities.

Skills

We are committed to investing in educating and training to ensure that the Irish workforce remains competitive. We will work with education partners to ensure third and fourth level providers are future proofing courses, and with apprenticeship and lifelong learning through local providers to ensure courses are accessible, affordable and in particular, adaptable for those who need assistance.

Business Rates

A priority for Aontú is a systematic review of commercial rates across the state in a costneutral reallocation exercise. We believe businesses should pay rates for the services provided by the state, but that rates should be reflective of the size, scale and profitability of a business. This is not the case at present and it is a major burden on domestic enterprises.

Aontú will seek to develop a digital and environmental tax that will provide a level playing field between many physical small businesses and large international giants such as Amazon. Out high streets are empty out of small businesses as these oligopolies swallow up more retail.

Spatially Balanced Enterprise Development

Ireland is moving towards becoming a ‘City State’, with Dublin increasingly semi-detached from its national hinterland, not unlike London. Aontú believes this phenomenon has not been properly recognized let alone addressed. A continuation of existing trends would undermine and subvert our cohesion as a country.

It is intrinsically regressive. We will press for more balanced national development, one which relieves pressure on our major cities and which benefits the whole country. There are now three Ireland’s; Dublin, a sprawling commuter belt and regions under significant pressure. Aontú opposes this fundamentally. Aontú will direct the IDA and Enterprise Ireland to further promote regional towns and cities in terms of new business projects.

Aontú also seeks to build a new international class city on the west coast of Ireland.

Our

Common Sense

Accountability Policy

€1,700,000,000

overspend on the National Children’s Hospital

€2,000,000,000

overspend on funding to NGO’s

€335,000

Dáil bike shed

€1,400,000

Security hut

€2,000,000

Dáil printer

€740,000

Carrick-on-Shannon bus stop

€1,600,000

RTÉ Barter account

€446,000

Pre-fab homes

37

Children missing from Tusla care

€10,300,000

Apple tax legal fees

More accountability Less waste

Aontú is proposing that a Junior Minister be appointed within the Department of the Taoiseach with direct responsibility for ensuring efficiency and eradicating waste throughout the public sector. They will report to the Taoiseach weekly. We are repeatedly told that decisions taken within agencies such as the OPW are not signed off by or overseen by Ministers. This new role will put an end to Ministers dodging responsibility.

We will change job specifications of all senior civil servants so they have a responsibility to mind the public purse and ensure value for money for taxpayers. Where they fail, there must be disciplinary measures up to and including losing their job. If there is no cost for waste, there will be no change.

We will also end the outsourcing of OPW contracts to third parties. The Office of Public Procurement should be equipped to ensure that these contracts are managed internally and are therefore scrutinised.

We will empower the Comptroller and Auditor General to intervene at any point in a contractual process to determine if rules have been followed and if the public is getting value for money throughout. This will need additional staff and resources for the CAG, which we will provide.

Currently, public contracts have a low level of specificity which can and have been taken advantage of. Tender documents need to be far more complete and specific to reduce the issue of continuous changes, additions and the ability of contractors to leverage more money from the state. We will ensure that the Office of Public Procurement has a statutory responsibility to ensure this.

A legacy of waste

The government has spent €300m on Metro North and not one shovel has been put in the ground. No one held to account.

The government spent €22 million on ventilators that didn’t work and has spent €50,000 storing them in a shed. No one held to account.

Over 100 electric buses were bought that didn’t move an inch for over 18 months because someone forgot to apply for planning permission for their charging points. No one held to account.

Flood defences in Midleton, promised in 2017 and the planning permission has still not even been submitted. No one held to account.

€20 million on pointless referendums where government Ministers blatantly mislead the public. No one held to account.

When the Taoiseach was Minister for Health, his Department measured a building incorrectly and spent €10 million on space that did not exist. No one held to account.

The M50 bridges built for £58m and Commuters are still paying billions of euro to use these bridges. No one held to account.

The Department of Foreign Affairs spent more than €825,000 on an OPW-led project to refurbish toilets and changing facilities at their headquarters. No one held to account.

The Office of Public Works (OPW) spent almost €70,000 on three sets of curtains at Dublin Castle. No one held to account.

The Dublin Criminal Court Complex cost €132m to build through PPP. It will cost you €603m. No one held to account.

The M50 upgrade cost €219m to build. It will cost you €1.015bn through PPP. No one held to account.

The M17/18 Gort to Tuam cost €271m to build. It will cost you €979m through PPP. No one held to account.

The MTU Music School in Cork cost €49m to build. It will cost you €222m through PPP. No one held to account.

The N25 New Ross Bypass cost €151m to build. It will cost you €346m through PPP. No one held to account.

The National Conference Centre cost €190m to build. It will cost you €763m through PPP. No one held to account.

Only Aontú is exposing and holding the Government parties to account.

Aontú has been to the fore in highlighting examples of government waste of tax-payer money, utilising our seat on the Oireachtas Finance Committee to seek accountability for disastrous spending. All told, among the huge scandals we have noted, this Government has wasted €billions of your money.

Whether it be through grilling Robert Watt, the Secretary General of the Department of Health, on why he feels he deserves a salary of €326,000 (to be reached in two years’ time), which is roughly the same as the US president, close to double the salary of the British Prime Minister, or holding the government to account over the extortionate cost of the Leinster House bicycle shelter, Aontú has been doing most of the heavy lifting on these scandals.

We also recognise however, that not every scandal has just a financial cost, but may have costs to those we seek to serve, their children and their families. That cannot be overlooked and cannot be dodged.

Office of Public Works

The OPW have come under scrutiny recently for paying huge amounts on resources for politicians such as the bike shelter and security hut in Leinster house which came in at €336,000 and €1.4 million respectively. The most recent information on the Distillery Building in Smithfield, which the OPW is renting at a cost of €12 million, even though it has been left vacant, is damning.

In the aftermath of the scandal the government were at pains to stress that the decision regarding spending was not theirs to make and was made by civil servants. This is not how the country should be run – democratically elected governments should have reasonable oversight and control over public spending.

That is what politicians are elected to do. Aontú will overhaul the current system to ensure that Ministers must sign off on future OPW projects or contracts which cost more than €1 million.

National Children’s Hospital

Leo Varadkar once said that said “short of an asteroid hitting the planet” the National Children’s Hospital would be built for €700m by 2020. It’s currently at €2.25 billion and still no opening date or anyone held to account. This is perhaps the most prominent example of government waste and it was the current Taoiseach who signed the contract.

Over the summer months a paediatric doctor was permitted to tour the €2.25 billion building site, and left the premises in tears, over the fact that so many of the rooms were not wheelchair accessible. 3,000 rooms at the hospital are not considered to be adequate.

One of the most shocking elements of this is that nobody has been held to account over the runaway costs. The Minister is refusing to disclose to us who signed off on the contract. The cost is now €1.45 billion more than what was initially promised. To put that in context we’ve asked the department of housing roughly how many one-bed social houses they could build for that figure, and it comes in at 6,446.

The overspend on the NCH has put a hole in the public purse the size of six and a half thousand council houses! Aontú will continue to push for accountability to ensure that the salaries and careers of Ministers and high-ranking civil servants take a hit when jobs are not done properly.

Covid Spending

During Covid, in particular we saw huge instances of waste that flew under the radar. The government purchased ten times the number of ventilators from China than it required. 100 of the ventilators that arrived were faulty. The government then took legal action to recoup the costs - this cost a half a million in legal costs. The government sought refunds of €50 million, but only got €30 million back. Since the start of this debacle, the faulty ventilators have been in storage at a cost of €50,000 per year.

We saw huge amounts spent on PPE which wasn’t fit for purpose also, and a spending spree on the ‘Be On Call for Ireland’ recruitment drive generated a database which was subsequently never tapped into. Millions were spent on self-isolation units and field hospitals which were barely used at all. Aontú is seeking an investigation into the waste of public money and is calling for full transparency from the government.

National Maternity Hospital

The overspend and the massive delay on the National Children's Hospital exists because of the ill-defined contract signed by Simon Harris, that has proven to be a shambles. It has created an open chequebook for BAM.

A whistleblower has furnished Aontú with a copy of the bill of quantities for the tender for the National Maternity Hospital. It appears that the Government is again rushing to tender before the job is properly designed. It also appears that the bill of quantities for the National Maternity Hospital is as half-baked as the contract for the National Children's Hospital.

Specifications of the contract are so loose that a contractor in future will be able to use the it as a blank cheque in a similar fashion.

We understand that there are only two companies now tendering for the mechanical elements of the National Maternity Hospital contract. It appears that the Government is heading for the same procurement car crash for the National Maternity Hospital that exists for the National Children's Hospital.

Aontú has put the government on notice and warned them of this problem. Ministers have been shrugging off our concerns, and they must be held to account if the same spending disaster happens with this hospital.

Cervical Check

In terms of Cervical Check, the government promised that no woman would have to go to court to achieve justice for the damage done by Cervical Check. The former Taoiseach even made an apology in front of the Dáil.

Yet since then, 400 women have had to bring cases to court. Incredibly 85% of Cervical Samples are still being sent abroad. No one has been held to account.

HSE Cyber attack

The cost of the cyber-attack on the HSE is over €100m and another €657 million on security upgrades.

The human cost, in terms of hundreds of thousands of very ill people not getting the treatment that they need is colossal. We don’t know how many people have died or suffered significant morbidity as a result.

The HSE is facing 473 cyber-attack lawsuits. An investigation found that before the attack the HSE was operating on a frail IT system and did not have proper cybersecurity expertise or resources. Prior to the attack the National Cyber Security Centre had a budget of just €5 million. For context, the Dept of the Taoiseach, spent 15million on PR during the same period.

The National Cyber Security Centre was, at the time of the attack, operating without a director or a fixed premises. No one has been held to account.

NGOs

The number of NGO’s in Ireland today is phenomenal. Some organisations have become dependent on the government for funding which allow Ministers to hold the sword of Damocles over them for support on social issues.

We will undertake a comprehensive audit of all funded NGO’s and we will fund those that offer value for money or offer valuable services in the community. We will not utilise taxpayers money to shore up those that do not.

State Care Chaos

Children are being lost from unregulated Tusla Special Emergency Accommodation and some are exposed to sexual exploitation. No one is being held to account.

In January 2024, 22 children went missing from State care. Previously, a 14-year-old girl who had been abducted by a criminal gang within minutes of being placed with Tusla was found one year later locked in a brothel.

A retired judge, Dermot Simms, tried to raise these matters with the Minister, but the Minister deleted his files, citing GDPR.

Children are being placed in Special Emergency Arrangements in unregulated circumstances with staff who are not vetted. A whistleblower tried to make a protected disclosure about unvetted care workers. Tusla tried to oppose that, but were ordered to accept it.

The Kyran Durnin case has shocked the country to the core.

This is a tragic and dark case that raises serious questions of the State. How broken is the State care system that we are not talking about an intervention here but we are talking about the potential murder of a child.

The political establishment has expressed shock and disbelief over what happened to Kyran but the truth is he is only one of 227 children who have died in State care, or known to State care in the last ten years. Of that 227, we know 11 were murdered.

Another child died as a result of a suspected non-accidental injury and a further child lost his life due to a suspected homicide. Forty children died because of suicide, eight because of drug overdose, 16 because of road traffic accidents and 18 by other accidents. We wish to reference some of the National Review Panel reports because these speak for themselves. We have ascribed pseudonyms to the children who have died.

The report on the death of ‘Hugh’, published in 2018, highlights how he was referred to CAMHS but was left without treatment due to CAMHS policy that prohibits young people who are using drugs or alcohol from access to the service. ‘Hugh’ died at the age of 16 from a drug overdose.

‘Niamh’, whose report was published in 2019, died at the age of 15 by suicide. She too, was deemed ineligible by CAMHS.

‘Ava’ is another case. She was a victim of child sexual abuse. The abuse occurred in one Tusla area and she lived in a different area. Area 1 believed that area 2 was speaking to Ava about the allegation and area 2 believed that area 1 was taking care of it.

A quote from the report: "This ultimately meant that nobody in Tusla spoke to Ava about her alleged experience of sexual abuse". CAMHS discharged her after the second appointment as it had no evidence of mental illness. She went missing at the age of 14 and her body was found a few days later.

The report on the death of ‘Luke’ is heartbreaking. He experienced sexual abuse as a child. His father died when Luke was nine and he found his father's body. His mother died shortly after that and Luke was put into foster care. In foster care, he was robbed and assaulted.

He then went to a homeless hostel. He faced threats in the hostel and he moved onto the streets. He then went to prison. There are no details of the circumstances of his death, only that his body was found two weeks after he was released from prison. He was a child.

Each of these cases represents a lost life, but also a shocking incompetence in a service overseen by the Government that should be tightly monitored and resourced in a way that enables it to provide the best care available. No-one has been held to account.

Attitude towards waste

The Gucci Government Bike Shed is a microcosm of the L‘oreal, ’I’m worth it’ attitude of the political establishment. The response is textbook. “Lessons will be learned” and a damp squib report will be published when everyone has moved on to the next scandal.

This government is incinerating tax payers money by the billions. Worse than that, much needed public infrastructure is grinding to a halt because of government incompetence. .

Enforce accountability at the ballot box

This government is an accountability-free zone. We are cursed to re-live a Groundhog Day of government incompetency unless there is a change.

Accountability means that there is a cost to wasteful decisions. Accountability means, that for repeated mistakes, someone would lose their job. The buck stops with them.

We invite you to implement accountability via the ballot box.

Our

Common Sense

Economic Policy

Our Economic Priorities

· Reverse the increase in Excise Duty on petrol and diesel and we will not proceed with carbon tax increases which will cost €500m.

· Reduce VAT on Restaurant and Pubs from 13.5% to 9% which the government parties refused to do only a few month ago, at a cost of €545,000,000.

· Aontú will adhere to a limit core spending growth of 5% each year, in line with the estimated trend growth rate of the Irish economy.

· Aontú will provide an additional, second rate of child benefit would be means tested. This additional child benefit benefiting 100,000 households. This has potential to take more than 40,000 children out of poverty. We estimate that introducing this payment would cost around €700 million per year.

· Aontú will provide a cap for childcare costs of €100 a week.

· Aontú will invest more to provide more places. We will do this through existing providers and by delivery through the public system. We will do this with schools if possible.

· We will make €3,000 childcare subvention available to mothers and fathers who choose to stay at home within the first 3 years of the child's life.

Aontú seeks prosperity for the Irish people. To achieve prosperity there must be spark in the economy. Aontú wants a society where people who work hard, who study, who invest time, effort and money, do well for themselves and their families.

Aontú is also a party of economic justice. We want to see a fair Ireland, an Ireland where there is a safety net under families who are genuinely in difficulty in terms of housing, health, education and transport.

Aontú is a fiscally prudent party. We will ensure that state spending and investment can be paid for through taxes and that we reduce our national debt. Economic bubbles fuelled through auction politics damage middle Ireland and the most vulnerable in society in the long run. Aontú is not a party of auction politics. Will not engage in the dangerous political game of ‘I see your billion euros and raise you another billion euros’. We are not the party of once off sugar rush payments.

Aontú will adhere to a limit core spending growth of 5% each year, in line with the estimated trend growth rate of the Irish economy.

Aontú is a party of reform. We will radically reform the way the government is spending tax payers money.

Reform

Aontú will establish a new Junior Minister to tackle waste. This Junior Minister will be located in the Dept of the Taoiseach. He or she will report to the Taoiseach each week on oversight of all tendering, procurement, and spending by the state. This will locate responsibility for fighting waste in the Department of the Taoiseach.

Aontú seeks to reform the dysfunctional markets in Irish society such as insurance, banking and food to ensure that they are competitive, that primary producers are paid properly and consumers see competitive prices.

Aontú will reform the Health Service so hospitals are paid for each operation, treatments and consultation they deliver. This will focus funds on revenue generating front line and away from layers of administration and management.

Aontú will resource the front properly to reduce the shocking level compensation that is paid out on an annual basis. (250m)

Aontú is a party of Infrastructural Investment

Aontú will use the resources of the state to provide badly needed housing, transport, energy and health infrastructure first and foremost. Infrastructure is the poor relation of election campaigns but it has a massive effect on the well being of citizens.

Ease the burden on Working Families

· Aontú would scrap the USC for all incomes below €50,000 in the next 5 years this would cost €1.9billion · In order to ease the burden on working families across the country, Aontú will: · Zero rate Electricity on VAT while electricity prices remain high. This will cost of €195,000,000 a year. · Reverse the increase in Excise Duty on petrol and diesel and we will not proceed with carbon tax increases which will cost €500m.

· Reduce VAT on Restaurant and Pubs from 13.5% to 9% which the government parties refused to do only a few month ago, at a cost of €545,000,000.

Aontú will lift families and communities out of poverty

· Aontú will provide an additional, second rate of child benefit would be means tested. This additional child benefit benefiting 100,000 households. This has potential to take more than 40,000 children out of poverty. We estimate that introducing this payment would cost around €700 million per year.

· Aontú will delivering Child Benefit to mothers from 4 months of pregnancy will cost €60,000,000 · Aontú will seek to negotiates changes to pay terms and conditions of doctors, nurses, teachers and Gardaí 10% to ensure they are competitive in an increasingly international labour market. We estimate that this will cost €160m in the first year.

· The old age pensions should be tied to the rate of inflation. Tax credit increases for workers should also be provided to pensioners and Aontú support Auto enrolment. Childcare The most expensive creche is in south Dublin, with a monthly full-day care fee set at €1,578 per child, while the least expensive creche is in Monaghan, charging €340 per month.

· Aontú will provide a cap for childcare costs of €100 a week.

· Aontú will invest more to provide more places. We will do this through existing providers and by delivery through the public system. We will do this with schools if possible.

· We will make €3,000 childcare subvention available to mothers and fathers who choose to stay at home within the first 3 years of the child's life.

Family policy

· Aontú will delete the means test for Carers Allowance. This will cost €450m a year.

· Increase the Home Carers' Credit to equalise the tax treatment of one-income couples and two-income couples that was created by tax individualisation.

Use of cash

Aontú will ensure that cash remains legal tender for all public services. Aontú Cllr Sarah O’Reilly successfully led a campaign to ensure the GAA would continue to accept cash at Cavan GAA games and we are determined that cash, which is the payment method of choice for older people in particular, remain accepted alongside digital payments for all government services.

We now have a fully enacted Access to Cash Act which reinforces that right and which now gives new powers to the Central Bank to direct banks to provide ATM’s within five to ten kilometres of a regional population centre.

This Act helps to copper fasten the continued use of cash in our society. Aontú has long campaigned against a move toward a cashless society, something we believe would heavily exclude vast numbers of our population. We challenged the GAA, the NCT and the banks themselves on their damaging plans to end cash.

Cash is the most inclusive way to pay for goods and services. Cash does not discriminate by age or skill level, whether someone has internet access or not. Cash gives all citizens the ability to participate fully in society. That is one of the cornerstones of democracy.

Our

Common Sense

Human Rights Policy

Our Human Rights Priorities

· Aontú will ensure that all SPHE and associated materials will adhere to the ethos of the parents and schools their children are being taught in.

· Aontú will provide the Children's Allowance for Mothers from the 4th month of pregnancy.

· Aontú believe that women and girls have the right to female only safe spaces.

· Aontú will ensure at all teaching is based on fact and science and age appropriate.

· Aontú advocate for a rape crisis centre in each county in the country and likewise a domestic violence refuge in each area.

Disability Rights

Aontú has long been campaigning for the rights for people with disabilities. Oftentimes Ireland can seem a cold, unwelcoming and uncaring place for people with disabilities. People with disabilities contribute enormously to our society. Unfortunately, they are not supported nearly enough by our government.

We still have a long way to go to assist people with disabilities and their families in this country, in terms of our laws, public services and welfare supports, but also in terms of our societal attitudes.

The lack of a national Personal Assistant (PA) policy in Ireland has left significant unmet needs, undermining the implementation of Article 19 of the UNCRPD, which guarantees the right to live independently and be included in the community. PAs are vital in enabling people with disabilities to exercise choice and control over their lives, access education, employment, and participate fully in society. However, the absence of a cohesive, rightsbased approach has led to inconsistent funding, long waiting lists, and inadequate support hours. The Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) highlights that investing in individualized support like PAs can lead to long-term savings by reducing reliance on institutional care and enabling social and economic participation. A national PA policy is urgently needed to address these gaps, ensure equitable access, and fulfill Ireland’s obligations under the UNCRPD, fostering independence, inclusion, and equality for people with disabilities.

Over the past decade 58,485 people with disabilities have appealed the decision by the Department of Social Protection to refuse them the Disability Allowance. Of these 39,658 have been successful in their appeal. The fact that 68% of those appealing the decision are successful strongly suggests there is a major problem in the Department where people with disabilities are wrongly being refused supports. Aontú is demanding an investigation into this to determine how many people have wrongly been denied the allowance, and to ensure they are swiftly offered support which is also backdated. Aontú is the only party which has raised this scandal in the Dáil.

We want to give the parents of unborn children with disabilities the confidence that support will be put in place to ensure their children can live to their full potential

Travelling Community

Aontú has asked the Taoiseach for a State apology for the Travelling community, for the systematic way in which governments discriminated against Travellers. In the past this country told Travelling people that they could only be accepted and included in society if they ceased being Travellers. Governments did this by way of legislation such as the Roads Acts and the Housing Acts, as well as the Commission on Itinerancy.

It was a blatant attempt to clamp down on an ethnic minority in our country and to make their way of life impossible for them. The State has never apologised for this. The demise of much of the Traveller culture such as the Cant language is sad to see. The dehumanising way in which Governments have treated Travellers and the long-lasting effect this has had on this ethnic minority is a cause of national shame. Aontú want to see funding for Traveller accommodation actually spent by Local Authorities and also for urgent intervention in terms of Health and Mental Health.

Migrant Rights

Aontú is seeking an investigation into the death rate in Direct Provision centres. 18% of those who have died in DP over the past two decades in Ireland were aged under 2 years. This is a very distressing figure, and there must be an immediate investigation into the matter.

Aontú is calling on the government to hold the Greek Coastguard to account over their shocking behaviour in the Mediterranean. Since 2020, over 10,000 people have died trying to cross the Mediterranean. The distress signal transcripts of these vessels, and the transcripts of calls made from passengers on the ship are heartbreaking to read.

Gender Based Violence

According to information secured by Aontú, the number of domestic abuse incidents have increased from 14,264 in 2014 to a shocking 46, 539 just last year. The figures for this year, so far, show that this dark trend is continuing. There are now 128 garda call outs for domestic abuse incidents every day of the year.

Ashling Murphy’s murder has forced this country to have a long overdue conversation about gender-based violence. Ireland is not as safe as it once was. If we are honest with ourselves, society has become harsher, more dangerous and more violent. In 2016, the CSO recorded 2,520 sexual offences. That increased to 3,340 by 2019. More than one in five, or 20.8%, of those assaults were committed by boys under the age of 18.

Access to hardcore pornography by young children contributes to violence against women. We witnessed the shocking murder of Ana Kriégel in recent years.

That case highlighted the fact that access to violent pornography especially plays a role in the attitudes of young boys to women. Countries such as Iceland, France and Italy are moving to ban the provision of hardcore porn to children. We in Aontú tabled a Bill that would ban hardcore pornography from being provided to children.

Aontú is a Human Rights party. Aontú is a pro life party and as such believes in Human Rights for all human beings born and unborn.

Right to Life

The Right to Life is a human right. Human Rights are universal, they apply to all humanity. The unborn child is a living individual human being like you and me. Aontú is a human rights party. We are a party that seeks to protect and support the most vulnerable. We are a party of compassion and peace. We support the right to life for everyone.

Shockingly there were 12,000 abortions last year. The abortion rate has massively increased in the last 5 years. 85% of abortions happen for socioeconomic reasons. The policies implemented by so called pro choice political parties make so many mothers feel that they don't have a choice.

We want to support mothers so they have the economic confidence to raise their children to their full potential. An example of this support in the last Dáil was the Aontú amendment to seek a eviction ban for mothers who were pregnant, people with disabilities, people with a terminal illness and older people. FF, FG and the Greens voted against this Aontú amendment.

Aontú will seek to protect the 3 day wait period for mothers who are contemplating abortion.

Aontú seek economic supports for all mothers who are pregnant.

We will provide the Children's Allowance for Mothers from the 4th month of pregnancy.

Aontú support a full freedom of conscience for everyone working in the medical sphere on the right to life.

Aontú support that all democratic norms would include the right to life.

Aontú oppose abortions based on whether the gender of the unborn child or whether he or she has a disability .

We seek that pain relief is given to unborn children during an abortion carried out after 20 weeks gestation.

We will ensure that the abortion system is not hidden and that a European standard of information is collected by the state.

We will seek that a mother has the choice of an Ultra Sound in advance of deciding whether or not to have an abortion

Aontú understands the size of this human rights challenge. We also understand the cultural changes needed to ensure that all human life is innately valued. We are committed to to respectfully campaign to achieve that objective.

We need to have an ethical conversation in relation to the fact that 95% of all children with Down Syndrome do not make it to term because of abortion. For a society that sees itself as respecting diversity, under the current legislation the lives of the vast majority of children with Down Syndrome are being ended before they are born. We need to challenge the culture that leads to this and seek legal protections for the lives of children with disabilities.

A number of documents released to Aontú have shown that in the first four months of lockdown, the number of people contacting the Rape Crisis Network Ireland helpline increased by 15%, while appointments increased by 11%. There needs to be a rape crisis centre in each county in the country and likewise a domestic violence refuge in each area. We also need to ensure harsher sentences for those who inflict abuse or violence against women.

Free Speech

Aontú opposes all forms of discrimination, and we oppose all incitement to violence. All forms of discrimination are wrong. Everyone who lives in this country, who is a citizen of this country must have equal rights. The colour of a persons skin is of no more important than the colour of their eyes. A republic is built on the foundation stone that all citizens are equal. Aontú believes in the idea of a liberal democracy where Freedom of Speech is protected at all costs. In history censorship has never ended well. Censorship is authoritarian. It deletes the liberty of the citizen. It deletes the competition of ideas. It reduces the ability to challenge and to test the prevailing ideologies.

Shockingly, Fine Gael, FF and the Green party, with the support of most of the opposition, have been attempting to bring in Hate Speech Laws which would land people in jail for having the wrong opinion. Aontú have resisted their attempts thus far, but they are still persisting and promising to bring more legislation under their next government. Aontú will continue to oppose, speak, and vote against censorship laws.

Education

Aontú believe in a pluralist education system in Ireland. Parents should be able to choose the ethos, within reason, within which their children receive education.

It must remembered that parents are employing the Department of Education to teach their children. The Minister for Education and the Department must listen to parents.

Education should be science based. It should be fact based. It should be age appropriate. It should not be based upon ideology or the latest intellectual fashion.

Many parents are deeply concern that much of new curriculum is schools is veering strongly towards ideology. This was evident in the recent schoolbooks that caricatured a traditional Irish family as negative, inward looking and regressive. This caused a major outcry.

The offending article in school books was shocking. The article negatively stereotype Irish people, Irish families and Irish culture. Ireland has a rich and vibrant cultural heritage that is loved across the world. Irish culture is unique. Its as key part of the diversity of the world. It’s something to be confident in and celebrated.

Concerns About SPHE

A number of teachers who attended a recent DCU course were shocked at the explicit nature of materials used. They were also shocked that the ethos being thought was in direct contraction of the ethos of their schools.

Due to pressure raised by Aontú and others a number of government Ministers and TDs publicly rebuked the content. They also reported that Minister Norma Foley did not agree with the content either. The problem here is that FF and FG ministers have been too weak to stand up for the concerns of parents.

The General Secretary of the Association of Secondary Teachers of Ireland has written to School Stewards to say that the SPHE and RSE programmes includes “sensitive issues” and that “teachers should only teach material they feel they are comfortable and competent to teach.

· Aontú will ensure that all SPHE and associated materials will adhere to the ethos of the parents and schools their children are being taught in.

· Aontú will ensure that students are taught about the growing dangers that exist to women and children because of the use of pornography.

· Aontú will ensure at all teaching is based on fact and science and age appropriate.

Gender Ideology

Aontú believes that a woman is a female adult. We don’t believe that men can be pregnant or can give birth. It shows you how far the political establishment has travelled from fact and science that Aontú is the only party in the Dáil that can make those two statements. Aontú believes in a compassionate pluralist Republic. All citizens are equal and valued no matter what their identity, ethnicity, religion or orientation. Everyone should be treated on the basis of their own individual character.

Gender dysphoria is real and is not easy for anyone. We need to treat all our citizens with respect and decency.

It is also really important that we have a society that is based on science and evidence. Evidence and science are not optional extras, they are critical in the development in a just and fair society.

Over the last 10 years the government and campaign groups have embarked on a significant campaign of social engineering. Incredibly the government have tried to delete the word woman from many different areas in society. They tried to delete the word woman from maternity legislation. Most recent all of the pollical parties other than Aontú have tried to delete the word mother from the constitution.

The HSE have use words such as chest feeding instead of breast feeding. In HSE literature produced to highlight cervical check services, the term “people with a cervix” was used instead of the word woman.

Teachers who have been told on ‘in service days’ not to use the words mother and father in class, that they are not inclusive enough. The NCCA have links on their website to source material for teachers that advise teachers not to use the words boys and girls in class for the same reason.

The former Taoiseach Leo Varadkar put pressure on Irish Rugby to reverse their decision to make Women’s rugby, female only, this despite the scientific evidence that shows that damage male born players can do to female players and negation of fair competition. Professor Donal O'Shea of the National Gender Service, a service that is deeply committed to supporting people with gender dysphoria, stated at an Oireachtas Committee that activists are 'brainwashing' politicians and HSE management when it comes to proposed new gender recognition laws.

Those who speak out are being shut down. J K Rowling could wallpaper her home with all of the death threats and threats to rape her she has received simply because she has stated that a woman is a female adult.

The government sought to introduce a “Hate Speech Bill” to create a chilling effect for people who respectfully sought to challenge this ideology. Young Gay and Lesbian people are told that they are not gay but they are in the wrong body. Gender affirmation in our schools is ignoring the potential that comorbidities children may have can lead them to question their gender.

Gender affirmation can put children on a path that can lead to chemicals, puberty blockers and irreversible surgery. And at the end the comorbidities that are causing the difficulties remained untreated. This can destroy a person’s fertility and cause serious health damage. It is leading to some people de-transitioning after the damage has been done.

Due to the damage being caused to children many other European countries reversing from policy based on ideology and are reverting to evidence-based science.

· Aontú believe that women and girls have the right to female only safe spaces.

· Aontú believe that sports should be based on fairness and women should be allowed to participate in women only sports.

· Aontú believe that all education in schools should be based on science and not ideology.

· Aontú seek to repeal the Gender Recognition Act to end the shocking government practice of male born sex offenders being placed in women’s prisons. We have already tabled legislation to this end.

· Aontú will end the practice of deleting the word woman, mother or girl being removed from legislation, our health service and from education.

Workers Rights

Aontú is committed to justice in the workplace and the rights of all workers on the island of Ireland to get fair pay for fair work to allow fair living conditions. We affirm the dignity of work and the right of workers to equitable pay and working environment.

Low pay and precarious work affects the lives of many workers across the island of Ireland. In many sectors and firms workers are treated without respect and with limited guarantees to paid hours. We need a strong and well-resourced agency to inspect compliance with labour legislation including practices in relation to minimum pay, contract work and rights to parental leave and sick pay.

Zero hour contracts should be outlawed once and for all across the whole island of Ireland with no opt outs by employers. Exploitive work such as 'bogus self-employment' where workers are forced by employers to declare themselves as self-employed in order for the employers to avoid tax and PRSI needs to be rooted out. This type of exploitation also results in workers being denied rights and safeguards that should go with their contract, as well as the State losing out on millions in tax.

The national minimum wage must be sufficient to lift the 100,000 working poor out of poverty. The living wage in Ireland is calculated as €14.80 per hour whereas the current minimum wage for those over 20 years old is €12.70.

A 'living wage' is what is deemed the necessary earnings to allow the average person to achieve a minimum acceptable standard of living. The minimum wage should reflect the living wage, albeit with separate formulae for the Greater Dublin Area and the rest of the island given the massive differences in cost of living.

Availing of work, education or training should be a right for all, worker and non-worker alike regardless of socio economic background, location, age or gender. Lifelong learning needs to be encouraged both for the benefit of the economy and society as a whole. Finland is a good case study for this, where one in five adults are engaged in self-motivated study at any one time. Implementation of a 'Job or Training' guarantee should start with persons under 25 and be extended gradually to the entire workforce.

A right to decent income during retirement must be established. While progress has been made over recent decades, many workers are extremely vulnerable to losing pension rights due to ever changing market conditions. The current pensions structure also means that state contributions rather than residency are the primary driver behind pension payments. The way to secure pensions is to link employee, employer and government contributions as part of a reformed social insurance model based on residency.

To prevent exploitation, there must be protections put in place and penalties for employers who sack domestic employees to be replaced with workers from abroad for slave wages.

It is vital that workers have access to a range of services and supports including payment during periods of sickness, parental leave and study leave. We believe the state should provide these supports.

Finally, it is imperative that workers have an unambiguous right to collective bargaining and trade union membership across the whole island. A constitutional referendum should be held to enshrine this right in Bunreacht na hÉireann.

Ár

mBeartas Ciallmhar Gaeilge

Is tábhachtach agus is luachmhar le muintir na hÉireann an Ghaeilge toisc gur cuid bhunúsach dínn í. Ceanglaíonn sí lenár dtimpeallacht muid. Is stór saibhir de litríocht, ealaíon, amhránaíocht, stair, miotaseolaíocht agus seanchas í. Struchtúr smaointeoireachta atá inti atá uathúil i ndomhan ina bhfuil éagsúlacht teanga á cailleadh ar bhonn bliantúil. Tá an Ghaeilge greanta ar ár n-ainmneacha agus ár dtírdhreach. Tá an Ghaeilge ar na teangacha is sine sa domhan agus ar an teanga choiteann scríofa is sine san Eoraip.

Tacaíonn Aontú leis na héilimh uile I nGaelVóta 24(Conradh na Gaeilge.)

1. Maoiniú na Gaeilge agus na Gaeltachta Tacaíonn Aontú l’éileamh GaelVóta (Conradh na Gaeilge) go gcuirfear ar a laghad, an maoiniú breise lorgtha sa ‘Plean Fáis - Plean Infheistíochta don Ghaeilge agus don Ghaeltacht 2024-2029’ ar fáil.

2. Scéim Labhairt na Gaeilge Tá beagnach 14 bliana caite ó chuir Fianna Fáil agus Fine Gael deireadh leis an scéim, gan aon scéim nua a chur ina háit. Ba cheart an scéim seo a athbheochan agus feabhas a chur uirthi ar bhonn na moltaí a rinneadh sa Staidéar Cuimsitheach Teangeolaíoch in 2007. Bheadh an scéim dírithe ar pháistí idir 3 agus 7 mbliana d’aois atá á dtógáil trí Ghaeilge sa Ghaeltacht agus taobh amuigh den Ghaeltacht. D’íocfaí deontas €1,000 in aghaidh na bliana le teaghlaigh a bhfuil páistí acu san aoisghrúpa sin atá in ann cumas líofa sa Ghaeilge a léiriú. Ní hamháin gur dreasacht a bheadh inti do thuismitheoirí Gaeilge a thabhairt dá bpáistí, ach uirlis thábhachtach staidrimh a bheadh ann freisin chun an seachadadh teanga idirghlúine a thomhas.

3. Comharthaí Bóithre Is cúis náire dúinn mar thír go bhfuil príomh-theanga na tíre curtha i gcló iodálach ar gach comhartha bóthair ar fud na tíre. Tugann sé íomhá do mhuintir na hÉireann agus do chuairteoirí chun na tíre nach bhfuil aon tábhacht leis an nGaeilge. Ba cheart an Ghaeilge a bheith ar comhchéim leis an mBéarla ó thaobh cló de. Ba cheart caighdeáin idirnáisiúnta maidir le comharthaíocht dhátheangach a ghlacadh agus an Ghaeilge a chur faoi dhath eile atá chomh soléite céanna leis an mBéarla. Ní gá a lán airgid a chaitheamh air seo. Is féidir linn an t-athrú sin a dhéanamh de réir a chéile. Bíonn saolré áirithe ag gach comhartha bóthair agus d’fhéadfaí na comharthaí nua a chur in ionad na seanchomharthaí de réir mar is gá iad a ionadú nó a dheisiú.

4. Tithíocht agus Tacaíocht sa Ghaeltacht Tá Aontú ag iarraidh cumhachtaí breise a thabhairt d’Údarás na Gaeltachta i dtaca le cúrsaí pleanála teanga chun a chinntiú go gcosnaítear leasanna phobal na Gaeltachta i ndáil le forbairtí móra sa Ghaeltacht a mbeadh impleachtaí teanga acu ar an nGaeltacht. Táimid ag iarraidh go mbeidh Údarás na Gaeltachta mar údarás pleanála sa Ghaeltacht cosúil l’aon Comhairle Contae eile agus go mbeidh sé mar údarás tithíochta ag díriú ar thithíocht a thógáil do mhuintir na nGaeltachta freisin. Táimid ag iarraidh na deiseanna a chinntiú is a úsáid do na daoine taobh istigh sa Ghaeltacht. Ba cheart do gach duine a rugadh agus a tógadh sa Ghaeltacht a bheith in ann teacht a thógáil ar a thalamh féin.

Cuirfidh Aontú tús le tionscadal le muintir na háite Gaeltachta chun plean a fhorbairt chun spreagadh agus tacaíocht chuí a thabhairt do mhuintir na háite dóthain lóistín a chur ar fáil do dhaltaí a fhreastalaíonn ar chúrsaí Gaeltachta.

Tacaíonn Aontú le éileamh GaelVóta go dtabharfar an chumhacht reachtúil agus na hacmhainní riachtanacha, idir reatha agus caipitil, d’Údarás na Gaeltachta le Rannóg Tithíochta a bhunú, le cur ar a chumas talamh a cheannach, cead pleanála a fháil, agus seirbhísí riachtanacha a chur ar fáil le gur féidir tithíocht a fhorbairt do chainteoirí Gaeilge sna ceantair Ghaeltachta;

Go gcuirfear maoiniú ar fáil go bliantúil do Roinn na Gaeltachta chun scéim na ndeontas tithíochta Ghaeltachta a reáchtáil arís de bhun Acht na dTithe (Gaeltacht) (Leasú), 2001, chun tacaíocht a chur ar fáil do chainteoirí Gaeilge a bheadh ag iarraidh teach a thógáil nó a athchóiriú sa Ghaeltacht;

Go bhfoilseofar agus go gcuirfear i bhfeidhm treoirlínte pleanála Gaeltachta láidre maidir le dualgas reachtúil na gcomhairlí contae i dtaobh caomhnú na Gaeilge mar theanga phobail sa Ghaeltacht;

Go gcuirfear Straitéis Daonra agus Tithíochta Gaeltachta le chéile do gach Limistéar Pleanála Teanga Gaeltachta le spriocanna soiléire, intomhaiste a leagadh amach chun fás inbhuanaithe na bpobal Gaeltachta a chinntiú, agus soláthar cuí tithíochta a chinntiú chun tacú leis an bhfás sin.

5. Scéim Forbartha Líonraí Gaeilge Taobh amuigh den Ghaeltacht, is í an scéim is tábhachtaí ó thaobh na pleanála teanga de an scéim forbartha líonraí Gaeilge de chuid Fhoras na Gaeilge. Rinne Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael agus Páirtí an Lucht Oibre scrios ar bhuiséad Fhoras na Gaeilge tar éis na géarchéime airgeadais agus níor cuireadh sin ina cheart ó shin i leith.

Tá cuid mhór eagraíochtaí ar fud na tíre a fhaigheann deontas ó Fhoras na Gaeilge chun an Ghaeilge a chur chun cinn go háitiúil trí ranganna, clubanna óige, imeachtaí pobail, grúpaí tuistí agus leanaí, campaí samhraidh agus go leor eile a eagrú, ach níl dóthain airgid ag teacht tríd an scéim seo le clár iomlán imeachtaí a chur i gcrích ná daoine a bhfuil saineolas acu ar an bpleanáil teanga a mhealladh chuig na poist sin

Faigheann an rialtas luach a airgid as an scéim sin toisc go dtéann beagnach gach pingin rua ar ais sa gheilleagar áitiúil agus cuirtear seirbhísí ar fáil don phobal ar an leibhéal áitiúil. Ba cheart an scéim seo a mhaoiniú i gceart agus í a leathnú chuig contaetha nach bhfuil ag baint leasa as an scéim.

6. Oideachas Tá na buntáistí suntasacha cognaíocha, cumarsáideacha agus sóisialta a bhaineann leis an nGaelscolaíocht léirithe san éileamh ollmhór fásmhar ar Ghaelscoileanna ar fud oileán na hÉireann

Tacaíonn Aontú leis an éileamh atá ag Conradh na Gaeilge le linn an olltoghcháin seo, agus go mion minic le linn thréimhse oifige an rialtais atá ann faoi láthair, polasaí cuimsitheach don Ghaeilge a thabhairt isteach a chumhdódh an córas oideachais ina iomláine, ón réamhscoil go dtí an ollscoil.

Tá díolúine ón nGaeilge ag duine amháin as gach ochtar a dhéanann an Ardteist. Tá méadú ollmhór tagtha ar an líon díolúintí ón nGaeilge ó d’athraigh An Roinn Oideachais an polasaí maidir le díolúintí cúpla bliain ó shin. Is léir go bhfuil an córas briste.

Ba cheart an Ghaeilge a theagasc de réir an chreata Eorpaigh um fhoghlaim teangacha. Ba cheart an deis a bheith ag gach scoláire staidéar a dhéanamh ar a dteanga dhúchais ar a leibhéal féin. Ba cheart béim a leagan ar an sealbhú teanga seachas ar aistí a scríobh agus freagraí scrúdaithe a fhoghlaim de ghlanmheabhair. Déanfaidh Aontú beart de réir briathair agus an polasaí sin a chur i bhfeidhm, rud nach ndearna Norma Foley.

Aontaímid leis an éileamh GaelVóta go bhforbrófar Polasaí don Ghaeilge sa Chóras Oideachais ón Oideachas Luath-Óige go dtí an Tríú Leibhéal (agus an polasaí ag díriú go sonrach ar chéard atáimid ag múineadh agus cén torthaí atá uainn) agus chuige sin:

• go mbunófar grúpa saineolach laistigh de 3 mhí de bhunú an Rialtais nua leis an bpolasaí seo a fhorbairt

• go mbunófar an polasaí ar an bhFráma Tagartha Comónta Eorpach do Theangacha le gach céim den chóras a nascadh le chéile

Oibreoidh Aontú le plean a fheidhmiú leis an líon daltaí ag freastail ar an oideachas lánGhaeilge a mhéadú ó 6% go 20% laistigh de 20 bliain agus oibreoidh siad chun gAire Stáit sa Roinn Oideachais a cheapadh le comhordú a dhéanamh ar fhorbairt na Gaeilge sa chóras oideachais trí chéile.

Creideann Aontú go bhfuil cuid mhaith deiseanna eile ar fáil nár úsáideadh riamh fós, chun oibre agus comhoibriú ar fud fad na tíre a fhorbairt, maidir l’oideachas agus le forbairt na teanga.

7. Aire Sinsearach Oibreoidh Aontú chun Aire Sinsearach a cheapadh, inniúil sa Ghaeilge, le bheith freagrach go díreach as cúrsaí Gaeilge & Gaeltachta sa Rialtas (agus ní Aire Stáit don Ghaeltacht mar atá ann anois.

8. Lipéadú Ba cheart don rialtas comhlachtaí a spreagadh a dhíolann earraí bia agus dí in Éirinn le lipéadú dátheangach a úsáid agus go gcuirfear rialacháin i bhfeidhm (go háirithe ar chomhlachtaí le láimhdeachais ard) mura dhéantar seo i slí substaintiúil laistigh den chéad dhá bhliain den Rialtas nua. Oibreoidh Aontú sa Dáil leis seo a chur I bhfeidhm

Our

Common Sense

Defence & Foreign Affairs Policy

Our Defence and Foreign Affairs Priorities

We are committed to re-instating the Supplementary Pension for fast accrual workers such as our Defence force members.

Aontú support the Triple Lock as key to our neutrality.

Aontú oppose treaty change. Aontú oppose any moves towards a military alliance.

Provision for a referendum on Irish unity should begin immediately and Ministers should work alongside counterparts in London to agree a referendum by 2030.

Defence

The biggest threat to Irish security is this Government. The Irish Defence Forces are facing major difficulties. Decades of underspending and a refusal by the government to pay staff an adequate salary has led to a collapse in the number of soldiers within the Army, and the inability of the Naval Service to float more than one Naval Service ship at a time.

We are committed to re-instating the Supplementary Pension for fast accrual workers such as our Defence force members.

Military Neutrality

Aontú is a party of military neutrality. Small countries have rightly been sceptical of the intentions of military blocks. Military blocks often orientate their military actions around their own economic objectives. We have seen that with the US in the Middle East. Small countries such as Ireland would have little or no influence on the decisions of large military blocs.

Having young Irish men and women fight in wars in which we would have little, or no influence would be a grave mistake. There is a “clamour” to exploit the Ukrainian crisis to move Ireland away to from its traditional position of military neutrality and to move closer to NATO and to the project of European militarisation.

Ursula Von Der Leyen has stated that she seeks to develop an EU Defence Union in the next EU Parliament term. This could mean a permanent Command and Control HQ, a new EU Defence Budget and Defence Research Programme paid for by member-states and an obligation to allocate 2% of GDP on defence spending.

It must be remembered that Ursula von der Leyen has significantly distorted Irish foreign policy in terms of the heart-breaking attacks on Palestinian civilians by the IDF. Ursula Von Der Leyen does not speak for Ireland. What makes us think that a new European Defence Union will represent Ireland either?

Last year, Micheál Martin said he is open to European Union treaty change on foot of proposals to overhaul the working of the union. This treaty change would remove Ireland’s veto on military policy. The Triple Lock blocks Ireland’s involvement in a European Defence Union. The Taoiseach has stated that he wants to end the Triple Lock.

Aontú support the Triple Lock as key to our neutrality.

Aontú oppose treaty change. Aontú oppose any moves towards a military alliance. Aontú seeks adequate spending on our army, naval and cyber defences.

Aontú seek to devolve Foreign Policy back to the nations states.

Aontú is not in favour of EU enlargement at this moment in time.

Aontú opposes EU federalism and the outsourcing of further power to the EU. We seek greater national self-determination and the devolution of more powers to the nation states.

Self-determination

Aontú seeks the independence of the Irish people north and south, east and west. We believe in self-determination; that decisions made as close to the people that they affect are better decisions. Irish people can influence those decisions and they can hold the decision makers to account. When decisions are made solely in London, Brussels and Berlin they are not made in Ireland’s interest.

London treats the northern economy like an economic backwater. At partition, over 80% of Ireland’s industrial output came from three counties around Belfast. Belfast was the largest city in Ireland and the north was by far the richest part of Ireland. The north of Ireland has been impoverished by London’s lack of interest in the 20th Century in the same manner the south of Ireland was in the 19th Century.

Practical Preparation are Necessary now

Not preparing for unity now is a serious mistake. The practical steps that need to be taken to ensure that the latter is achieved in a peaceful and harmonious fashion, must now be taken.

The All Ireland Economy was promised under the Good Friday Agreement but it has received precious little attention from the establishment. This means planning together, funding together and delivering services together on an All-Ireland basis. We need to be practical in the development of convergence across the Ireland in terms of taxes, enterprise, health care and supports. Better, more effective and more efficient infrastructure and services are a threat to no one.

The Next Steps

Aontú believe that the North-South Unit within the Department of the Taoiseach should be directed to produce achievable objectives towards unit for the lifetime of the next Dáil and these should be incorporated within the Programme for Government. They should include social, economic, governmental and consultative projects with funding allocated.

Provision for a referendum on Irish unity should begin immediately and Ministers should work alongside counterparts in London to agree a referendum by 2030.

Aontú supports the provision for an All-Ireland Forum encompassing civic society to help plan for unity.

We have introduced legislation to give Northern MP’s places on Oireachtas committees and speaking rights in the Dáil, to extend voting rights in Presidential elections to all Irish citizens living on the island, and seek an Irish Sea Border.

Middle East

Aontú recognizes that the State of Israel is committing war crimes and crimes against humanity. The UN Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices has said that Israel's warfare in Gaza is consistent with the characteristics of genocide. 70% of all those killed in Gaza have been women and children. The figures is even higher for non combatants. We are urging the Irish government to both recognise these crimes, and act to help end them.

Aontú believes that no one should profit from Israel's occupation of Palestine we pledge to give our full support to both the Occupied Territories Bill to ban trade with Israel's illegal colonial settlements, and to the Illegal Israeli Settlements Divestment Bill to ban Irish state investments in entities complicit in the illegal settlements enterprise. Further we will support calls for an EU-wide ban on trade with illegal settlements.

Aontú believe Ireland should not be in any way aide Israel's war machine. We pledge to work to end the use of Irish airports and airspace for the transport of weapons, components, tech, surveillance or other items that help Israel to maintain its illegal occupation and commit war crimes against the people of Palestine. To this end we support the Arms Embargo Bill and call for an end to the US Military's use of Irish airports.

Aontú believe sanctions and isolation are important international pressure tools. We pledge to support immediate lawful economic sanctions against Israel, expelling the Israeli ambassador, and a military-security embargo as called for by the UN Human Rights Council. This would include ending the export of 'dual-use' items (which have both military and civilian uses) to Israel, and conducting an ethics audit to ensure that Irish public institutions are in no way complicit whether through co-operative links, procurement or funding.

We will do all we can to achieve peace and save human lives. We will seek to ensure Free Speech on Palestine and all other issues. Aontú are the only party to stand for Free Speech consistently. No one should be silenced for advocating for human rights.

Aontú completely oppose the vicious violence of Hamas. Aontú demand the immediate release of all remaining hostages. Aontú will work for peaceful democratic elections in Palestine. We fully support the right of Israel and Palestine to peacefully coexists. All nations have a right to defend themselves. But defense must always be proportionate and follow the rules of international law.

Our

Common Sense

Agriculture & Rural Life Policy

€5.76

average hourly rate of a dairy farmer today

23.4%

of farmers considered at risk of suicide

in 2023, farm income dropped to below €20,000

Our Farming and Rural Life Priorities

· Instigate a comprehensive review of fishing policy that has not addressed the unequal sharing opportunities for over 50 years.

· Fertiliser: For the next few years the government should subsidise the cost of fertiliser - we should have fertiliser credits for farmers in the same way that we had electricity credits during the inflation crisis in terms of energy.

· Agricultural relief: Aontú believes the Beef Welfare Scheme needs more imaginative environmentally sustainable measures such as a payment to encourage less use of antibiotics and anthlemintics.

· We will create a strong market competition authority.

· Aontú are committed to excluding active farmland from the RZLT because we know it will close small family farms and force many others to sell their land.

· Aontú is calling for the Rural Environment Protection Scheme (REPS) to be replaced by a Whole Farm Environmental Scheme with a base payment of €15,000.

Farming is in crisis in Ireland. We don't make that statement lightly.

A new report by Teagasc confirms income levels across farms fell in 2023. Dairy incomes averaged €49,000 in 2023, a decrease of 69% compared to the 2022 level. Tillage farm income fell 71% last year, to just €21,400. Drystock farm income also fell in 2023. The average income for Cattle farms fell by 14% last year to €12,600. Sheep farm incomes fell 22% to just €12,500 last year.

Across all farm types the average income has dropped by 57% in 2023 to just under €20,000. These are massive falls. They are stunning. All of his before we even mention the massive increase in input costs in farming in those last few years. As a result of income falls every year farmers are leaving the sector.

If were to happen in any other sector, it would be front page news and it would dominate the Dáil debates. It shows beyond a doubt that farming is no longer a sustainable livelihood for most families.

According to Teagasc 1/3 of farmers are making a loss. Many are going into debt. Many of them are in poverty. 1/3 of farmers are only making a living because someone in the family is working off the farm to supplement the income of the farm. Only 1/3 of farmers currently are actually making a living from farming.

That's an incredible situation. One of the most important sectors in society, the sector that produces our food and the sector that's the backbone of our rural community is collapsing. Even if you had no interest in farming families or rural Ireland, this is a very serious issue. If here are no farmers, there is no food and as a result there is no future. Food security has increased in importance in the last few years.

The Russian invasion of Ukraine shut down so many supply chains leading to products not being available but also to significant inflation. Covid too shut down so many supply chains and created enormous product inflation. Even the Suez Canal blockage had an effect on supply and prices in some areas. Food security necessitates a viable farming sector.

The damage being done to farmers is affecting rural and regional Ireland. If the family farm dies so too does rural Ireland. Food lots, industrial farms may keep production up, but they won't send children to local schools, buy in local shops, play for the local football team and socialise in the local pub.

Aontú will reform the food market

You might think that there is no money in food. But this is not the case. Food production is a multibillion euro industry. It's a highly profitable industry. There are three elements in the food supply chain; farmers, food processors and supermarkets. Farmers do by far the most work but they receive the least mount of profit.

Food processors on the other hand are very profitable. Profits are very well hidden in the beef processing sector. One such beef processor had an income of €4billion in 2022. Profits are estimated to be over €200m and tax is paid through a network of holding companies in Britain, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, and Jersey. Its estimated that the actual tax rate paid may have been as low as 2%.

Supermarkets are also raking in profits - often well-hidden but its reported that Tesco are make €104 million in profit in 2023. SuperValu saw revenues increase to €4.7bn during 2022 and saw profits after tax reach nearly €100m. Aldi Ireland makes €2.03bn and has profits of €17.2m

The truth is the food market in Ireland operates as an oligopoly. A small number of supermarkets and beef barons have massive buyer power, they have control over all aspects of the market. As a result they are making super normal profits.

Fair Price for Beef Farmers

Aontú brought legislation to the Dáil both in this term and the last term seeking to create a floor below the price of beef, to ensure that factories and supermarkets are forced by law to give at least a break-even price to farmers per beast. It is an extraordinary measure but not without precedent.

The government have intervened in the market before in terms of putting a floor below the price of alcohol. The situation facing beef farmers is extraordinary and as such serious measures must be considered. A third of farmers are currently operating at a loss.

Oppose Mercosur Trade Deal

Aontú is opposed to the Mercosur Trade Deal which will see the Irish Beef market in Europe replaced by the South American market. This deal will crush the Irish farmer and will do untold damage to the environment. In Brazil deforestation, over-grazing and wildfires all form part of the agricultural method, not to mention the carbon cost associated with transporting the beef to Europe.

Irish grass-raised beef is second to none, the quality is superb. If we were serious about tackling climate change and reducing emissions, we would support Irish beef farmers and oppose this deal from Europe.

Culling the Herd

Aontú is extremely alarmed at the content of a report from the Environmental Protection Agency last year which suggests that a national herd cull of 30% would be required to meet climate targets. The findings of this report show that the most vulnerable will be targeted in the government's emissions reductions. The report found that a reduction in livestock numbers, 30% reduction in the national herd, the quadrupling of forestry cover and the rewetting of 90% of reclaimed land would be necessary to meet the government's targets.

Aontú was the only political party to oppose the Climate Action Bill in the Dáil. We did as we knew this Bill would increase pressure on farmers. Sinn Féin are speaking out of both sides of their mouths on this issue - they supported the Climate Action Bill, they voted in favour of it - of the legislation which paved the way for these targets and reductions in herd numbers.

The government's farming policy is forcing farmers to increase stock levels. This economic policy is pushing farmers into poverty and having an enormous impact on the environment. If farmers received more profit per beast, they would not have to stock so much.

Aontú will create a strong competition authority

In the long run to fix this situation we need a stronger competition authority. We don't have that yet. This competition authority will be responsible for reducing the buyer power of food processors and supermarkets. Over time it will have the objective of increasing the number of food processors there are within the market to ensure proper competition for farm produce.

Many will be surprised that there is such a thing as below cost sale of food. But it happens regularly. Factories and supermarkets are regularly pushing down prices, regularly squeezing farmers for every last cent. The power imbalance within the market regularly pushes farmers into poverty.

This happened recently at a large scale during the beef protests. Aontú travelled the country at the time to meet with the protesting farmers. Beef farmers were threatened with an injunction along with other protesters at the time. Aontú was forced to go to the High Court to defend these farmers.

Now some people say that if you increase the amount of money that is paid out to farmers, that this would push up the price of food at the check out. This is not true. There is enough profit within the food sector to increase the price to farmers and keep checkout prices from rising.

The exploitative nature of the food market is not limited to beef, poultry, pigs, and sheep also feel the effects of this. We need to tackle the exploitative nature of the whole food market. None of this is happening by accident.

In 2020, the FG Chair of the Agricultural Committee Chair said that it was unreasonable for farmers to expect a price above the cost of production. The current Minister for Agriculture agreed with the chair, saying that it was unreasonable that farmers would expect a price above the cost of production.

Turn that around for a second, imagine if some one asked a TD to work a 70 hour a week, attend the Dail, develop legislation, and meet and represent constituents. Imagine if they asked TD’s to do it for a wage less than the actual cost of doing the work. This would not be acceptable.

Oppose the Ban on Turf

Aontú is deeply concerned in relation to the attempts by the Green Party, with the support of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael to stop people from burning turf. The draft Air Pollution Amendment Bill 2024 is extremely alarming. This Bill is a back-door way for the Greens to stop us burning turf.

The legislation would grant wide-ranging powers to the Minister to prohibit the "sale, production, distribution, transportation or storage of fuel of any type or description". It grants full power to the Minister to decide the "standard, specification, composition of any type of fuel which is burned in fireplaces" or "fireplaces in a particular area" which will be prohibited - and the Minister would be able to do this without a Dáil vote.

This proposed legislation sets out extraordinary powers which could see councils stop cars, and raid houses. The punishments set about in the document are very severe from a fine of €1,000 to a three-month stay in prison. The government has betrayed rural Ireland, and we in Aontú are determined to hold them to account and resist the damaging proposals which they're trying to inflict on ordinary hard-working country people.

Fishing

Irish fishermen have seen their sector gutted in recent years. Irish fish and fishing rights have been handed over lock, stock and barrel to other countries. Indeed, many countries are doing far better out of Irish waters, than Irish fishermen themselves.

According to Departmental projections, Ireland’s coastal share of fish will shrink by at least 15% in the next 6 years. The mean reduction in fishing quota per EU Member State is 9.83% - Ireland’s reduction significantly surpasses that loss. In fact Ireland’s fishing industry is the joint highest loser with Germany.

Now after being hammered by Dublin and Brussels, Irish fishermen are now being forced to weigh on the pier to fulfil regulations. No other fishing sector has been so poorly treated by its own government and by the EU.

The crisis in fishing is so profound, that Irish fishing boats are changing their Irish flags for Spanish ones to increase their quota. Meanwhile 25-30 juggernauts of Irish fish are leaving this country weekly – unchecked. To put this into perspective: in Monkfish, France has 59% of the quota in Irish waters. Ireland has 7%. In Haddock, Ireland has only 22% - France 67%. In Hake, Ireland has 6% - France 45%. And the most shocking of all, in Sole – Belgium has the majority of the quota.

Meanwhile, Irish fishermen cannot catch one fish in the North Sea. This crisis is beyond belief, it has actually reached breaking point. Each year, the French and Spanish fleets fishing in Irish waters don’t catch their full quota – and Aontú;

will fight in Brussels for the Irish fishing industry to be given that excess to keep the trade alive.

Failure is not an option – those communities that are being hammered by these practices are now exporting their young people who are leaving to find work. They may never come back.

Aontú will be working hard in the lead up to the 2026 Brexit fishing agreement renegotiation for fair play in our fishing industry – for Irish boats in Irish waters to be able to thrive, not just survive.

Aontú will seek to claw back some of our sovereignty in the fishing industry, by way of legislation and legal action against the EU if necessary.

We will:

Instigate a comprehensive review of fishing policy that has not addressed the unequal sharing opportunities for over 50 years.

Spearhead an EU strategy to entice new young entrants into the industry.

End the importation of fish products that undermine the Common Market Organisation regarding the protection of our processing sector.

Work to end the over regulation of the industry that forces vessels to return to port for small breaches.

Address the uneven distribution of EU funds between the member states, the European maritime fisheries aquaculture fund.

Push for the introduction of a strategic plan to assist all sectors, prioritising the polyvalent section of our fleet starting with small scale fishermen.

Nature Restoration Law Bad for Ireland

The Nature Restoration Law presents a huge threat to farmers. This law creates targets to restore drained peatlands currently under agricultural use by 30% in 2030, 40% by 2040 and 50% by 2050. It is estimated that there are currently 852,513 acres of such land in Ireland, though the true figure and manner of categorising drained peatlands is difficult to ascertain. If this figure is accurate then it means that potentially a half a million acres of land could be taken out of agriculture in Ireland over the next thirty years.

This EU law, which was supported by the Government parties, and welcomed by a Sinn Féin MEP, is pointed directly at Ireland. Few other countries have such a thing as ‘reclaimed bog’. What the government and EU commission fail to realise is the strain this will put on farmers.

The farming sector has every reason to hold the government’s financial incentives in suspicion given how often they have been let down previously. We will insist that state owned land be used to ensure Ireland meets its EU obligations.

Cost of Farm Fertiliser

At the start of last year the average bag of fertiliser cost 223% of what it did in 2010. The Russian invasion of Ukraine and the associated sanctions taken by Ireland and Europe resulted in an unprecedented rise in the cost of fertiliser. Few politicians seemed interested in this at the time, but Aontú has been raising the matter persistently with the Minister for Agriculture in the Dáil.

The scale of the inflation in terms of the cost of fertiliser was absolutely colossal. Farmers around the country were left with two options - either fork out the money that they didn't have, or else refrain from using fertiliser altogether. The rise in cost, we believe, actually suited this government's agenda.

For those farmers who did pay , they're now stuck in losses and debt. For those who did without, they're not making profit either because their grass yield, the number of bales of hay and silage they produced from their fields was down on previous years as a result.

While we welcome the recent reduction in the cost of inflation, we feel the damage has been done - farmers across the country are neck deep in debt, farms are not turning over profits in many instances, and farming is becoming less viable as a sole means of income.

Young farmers are emigrating, and fewer and fewer are obtaining the green cert. This is heartbreaking for farmers, especially those whose families have farmed that land since the famine.

We need emergency supports now. For the next few years the government should subsidise the cost of fertiliser - we should have fertiliser credits for farmers in the same way that we had electricity credits during the inflation crisis in terms of energy.

Agricultural relief

Aontú believes that the changes to Agricultural relief in budget 2025 are detrimental to the family farm model. The 6 year usage rule will hinder genuine farm transfers to the next generation as genuine family farms may be excluded. It does little to address land banking by wealthy non farm investors. Aontú will fight to reverse these measures.

Aontú believes the Beef Welfare Scheme needs more imaginative environmentally sustainable measures such as a payment to encourage less use of antibiotics and anthlemintics.

Supports for Farmers

Under the BWS and the SCEP Aontú seeks to increase support to farmers to €300 per suckler cow and €37 per ewe. Aontú seek a Tillage Survival Scheme payment of €250/ha and a Tillage Expansion Scheme of €400/ha to be paid on land converted into tillage in year 1. There must also be a maintenance payment of €250/ha in year 2. Aontú seek €100 per dairy and suckling yearling and €100/dairy beef calf.

CAP funding must be increased and used to support farmers, food production and food security. EU environment actions must be financed through a separate fund. This separate fund should be focused on actions from future implementation of the EU Nature Restoration Law.

Farmers as stewards of the land

Nearly half of Ireland's surface waters are in an unsatisfactory condition due to the damage being caused by activities that release pollutants into our environment and physical alterations that damage habitats and ecosystems. The trends indicate that, overall, water quality is declining and getting worse.

This Government have sought to blame farmers for this damage. Farmers have a role to play. We will demand that other stakeholders are held to account.

Young farmers

We know that there are fewer and fewer young people in farming. Aontú recognise that younger farmers are increasingly concerned about agricultural supports for young farmers; general practice healthcare and wellbeing; housing and transport.

The financial support for these farmers is simply not making a difference. The Complementary Income Support for Young Farmers (CISYF) is now being paid to around 6,000 farmers, and the level of funding works out at just over €5,000.

The scarcity of healthcare in rural communities, especially the provision of primary care, coupled with crumbling infrastructure and a lack of housing is something that Aontú TDs will prioritise and deliver on. We have stood by rural communities up and down the country and our people are ready to transform that activism into action.

Farmers mental health

Aontú recognise that farming isn’t just a profession, it is a way of life and one that comes with unique challenges and strains. A report by UCD has revealed that more farmers have had suicidal thoughts than the populace at large. A changing landscape arising from Government initiatives on climate change, isolation and the stress of worrying about the future of the farm have all contributed to this situation.

Whilst Aontú are committed to creating a fully funded and resourced Mental Health Service, it is clear that farmers need additional support and so we will ensure that talking therapies for farmers are introduced - by farmers and for farmers.

We will ensure that any therapeutic initiatives for farmers are accessible in their locality, and we will be investigating how local communities can produce counsellors and these roles are sustainable, either through subsidised courses or by providing hub and spoke services in counties. Aontú has a full range of mental health proposals which can be read on our website.

Residential Zoned Land Tax

RZLT disproportionally affect farmers as if they are land speculators. Ministers have made repeated promises that active farmland would be excluded from the tax, yet have made no changes to the proposals which come into effect in months.

Aontú are committed to excluding active farmland from the RZLT because we know it will close small family farms and force many others to sell their land.

According to the Irish Farmers Association, an average-sized suckler farm with seven acres of zoned land valued at €50,000/acre would pay €10,500 annual RZLT liability. The entire yearly income for a farm of this size in 2022 was €8,324.

Infrastructure, Climate and Nature Fund

Over the next six years, the fund will allocate €2 billion annually, and Aontú want to ensure that it actually benefits farmers and rural communities, specifically with on-farm sustainability investments.

Aontú TDs will lobby to ensure that the fund is focussed on agriculture and aquaculture and ensuring the sustainability of the rural way of life for the future.

Scheme Reform

The Agri-Climate Rural Environment Scheme (ACRES) is not working for farmers. It must be reformed. Aontú is calling for the Rural Environment Protection Scheme (REPS) to be replaced by a Whole Farm Environmental Scheme with a base payment of €15,000.

Energy as a Crop

Aontú will grant fund farmers to allow for increased microgeneration of electricity on farms. Aontú want to see more anaerobic digestors, small scale solar and small wind projects on farmland and sheds to allow farms become more energy sufficient and environmentally friendly. This will also ensure an increased income stream for farms. Such developments should be unintrusive to local communities were possible or achieve the consent of local communities. Sheds and marginal land should be used for solar electricity generation.

A Complete Review of the TB Crisis

Aontú is calling for a complete review of the TB crisis. The number of bovine TB outbreaks has increased significantly in past 12 months. This is doing significant damage to the farming sector. The crisis is ongoing, with massive costs and no end in sight. Aontú in government will undertake a complete review of the issue so that a solution can be found to bring an end to the mess.

Regional Development

Ireland is developing into a city state. Continuous lobsided spatial development had led to hundreds of thousands of people being condemned to a commuter hell. Dublin is overheating. People are commuting from Ulster, Connacht and Munster into Dublin on a daily basis and much of regional Ireland is emptying of its young people. The establishment parties are increasingly Dublin based.

Aontú will:

• Aontú seek to create a new international city in the western seaboard of Ireland to help rebalance Irelands lobsided spatial development. Infrastructure will be front loaded into this city growing it to a critical mass to the point where it can draw down international investment in its own right. This will operate as a counterweight to Dublin.

• Aontú also seek to develop a Border Innovation Zone. This would be supported by infrastructural investment and derogation on European grant funding rules for a 10-year period to kick-start investment.

• Aontú will harness the SEUPB for border counties and the EU Regional Development Fund to address the infrastructural deficit across the midlands.

• Prioritise the opening of Waterford airport to an international carrier.

• Reopen the Western Rail Corridor and the Navan to Dublin Line of provincial rail lines.

• Expand public transport in rural towns and villages.

• Increase investment into the resurfacing of roads that have been neglected

Our

Common Sense

Crime & Anti-Social Behaviour Policy

Our Crime Priorities

· Aontú will increase the number of Gardaí to 18,000 in 5 years at an estimated cost of €348m.

· Aontú will reopen 26 rural and regional Garda stations. This will cost €30m

· Aontú will review the accessibility of in-patient rehabilitation and detoxification services across the State to ensure that those who need them can access them without excessive travel.

· Aontú will add 400 prison spaces, just under 10% of total capacity to the prison system in the next 5 years. This will cost €33.6m in current spending.

· Aontú will provide on summary a six-month custodial imprisonment sentence or on conviction or indictment, two years imprisonment for attacking and injuring a Garda.

Ireland is becoming more violent. We have reached a dangerous tipping point in terms of crime and anti-social behaviour in towns and villages across the country.

Incidents of rape and sexual assault have have doubled in the last 10 years. However, only a minority of those incidents are prosecuted and tried. The murder rate is increasing year after year. Human trafficking, theft and violent crimes are all increasing while Garda numbers are collapsing. This is the legacy of 14 years of Fine Gael Government.

Rising Crime

We were told that the murder of Ashling Murphy, a young woman just going for a run, was a 'watershed' in this country. But a short time later, a mother of two, Lisa Thompson, was found murdered in her Ballymun home.

Violent murders such as that of Aidan Moffitt and Michael Snee in Sligo, the brutal dismembering and burning of 17-year-old Keane Mulready-Woods and the murder and sexual assault of 14-year-old Ana Kriégel show that Irish society is changing radically.

The spike in violent crime unfolding in towns and villages across the country has not happened by accident. There are societal factors leading to this increase, but the collapse in Garda numbers is also a major contributory factor. Garda numbers per capita are at their lowest in 5 years.

Rank and file garda numbers are at the lowest in 6 years. Indeed, Ireland now has one of the smallest per capita police forces in the whole of the EU.

Road Deaths Increasing

The number of people before the courts for drug driving and dangerous driving has been increasing each year. Statistics released show that the number of people before the courts in the last four years for drug driving has almost doubled year on year. The number of persons before the courts for 'dangerous driving' has increased also in recent years.

The number of Gardaí assigned to police our roads is now lower than at any stage in the last fourteen years. It has dropped 36%. There is a clear correlation between the lower number of Gardaí on the roads, the increase in drug driving and dangerous driving offences, and the very tragic headlines on our TV screens each day.

An Garda Síochána

Shockingly, over the summer months the Australian government employed more Irish Gardaí than the Irish Government. This is happening because the pay, terms and conditions are now better abroad for Gardaí than in Ireland. Also, many young Gardaí are leaving Ireland to get a chance to buy a house.

Aontú will Introduce a Minimum Custodial Sentence for Injury to a Garda

Being a Garda is also more dangerous than ever. Aontú discovered that 2,411 Gardaí have been assaulted while on active duty over the last decade. It is completely unacceptable that hundreds of Gardaí going about their service to the community are assaulted. This is a terrifying figure for both Gardaí and their families.

Aontú has submitted a new Bill to the Dáil that if enacted would provide for a minimum custodial sentence for those who physically assault a Garda, Health or Emergency Service worker. In government Aontú would ensure this Bill becomes law. The Aontú Bill provides, on summary conviction, a six months custodial imprisonment sentence or, on conviction on indictment, two years imprisonment.

Aontú will increase the number of Gardaí to 18,000 in 5 years.

According to a Eurostat report in 2016 Ireland had one of the smallest per capita police forces in the EU at 278 Garda for every 100,000 people. This was 40 police officers per 100,000 people less than the EU average. The most recent figure that Aontú has received from the Department of Justice shows that there are now only 280 Gardaí per 100,000 in the state. This leaves Gardaí vulnerable.

Aontú will ensure this government conduct an immediate review of the present An Garda Síochána force with the engagement of all stakeholders, to be chaired by the Taoiseach and recommendations made following this. Aontú will also increase the number of Gardaí to 18,000 in five years, at an estimated cost of €348m.

·Aontú will reopen 26 rural and regional Garda stations. This will cost €30m. Many rural Garda stations are open for just a few hours a week. With the increased number of Gardaí in Aontú’s plan, we will see many of these returned to full time service.

Aontú will ensure this government conducts an immediate review of the present An Garda Síochána force with the engagement of all stakeholders, to be chaired by the Taoiseach with recommendations made following this.

Community Safety

Aontú will promote better community relationships with Gardaí and local residents with a view to mobilising more visible uniformed Gardaí on the beat. We will ensure community policing initiatives are supported by government, local councils and organisations.

·Aontú will invest in community centres, community sports facilities, drug rehabilitation, mental health services and interventions. We will extend existing services, reduce waiting times and improve the rate of early intervention.

Zero Tolerance for Gender Based Violence

We have seen some shocking cases of femicide and violence against women in the media and courts in recent years. Aontú discovered that since 2019 there has been a 40% increase in the number of Garda callouts to instances of domestic violence.

In 2022 the number of people, mainly women, attending a sexual assault treatment unit surpassed one thousand for the first time ever. The courts appear to be handing down unacceptably lenient sentences to the perpetrators of gender-based violence and this urgently needs to be tackled.

· Aontú will meet our responsibilities under the Istanbul Convention. We will accelerate the delivery of Women’s Refuges and Rape Crisis Centres in counties without these services.

· Aontú will ensure government funding for training for all schools and workshops for parents on the dangers of internet and implementation of filters on internet use in the home and on devices.

· Aontú will ensure that cash remains in widespread use so that those in abusive relationships have the means to leave and not rely on digital payments that may reveal their whereabouts.

· Aontú will increase funding to organisations supporting women suffering from domestic violence

Online safety

The danger that the proliferation of online pornography poses to our children is one that has gone unchecked for far too long. Today eight and nine year olds have access to hardcore explicit materials that would have been illegal viewing for adults just a short time ago.

Research at the School of Psychology in University of Galway has shown that almost 60% of teenage boys living in Ireland see porn before the age of thirteen. Pornography has become so easily accessible that many parents feel it is virtually impossible for them to exercise control over what their children are consuming.

Access to pornography is sexualising children at a far younger age. It can radically alter their perceptions of sex, their own understandings of healthy relationships and can lead to physical and mental health problems. Pornography often contains scenes of violence and aggression. There is significant evidence showing that some young children viewing this kind of material will act it out on other children. Research also indicates that pornography can lead to violence against women and children.

Aontú have introduced a Bill in the Dáil to ensure that children in the state cannot view pornographic material on the internet. Our bill seeks to ban online companies from selling, circulating or distributing pornography to children.

· In the previous Dáil term, Aontú submitted the Protection of Children (Online Pornographic Material) Bill (2020) to the Dáil, making the online provision of pornography by internet companies to children illegal. We will ensure it becomes legislation in Government.

Drugs, Alcohol and Addiction

Drug dealing is off the Richter scale in many parts of Ireland at the moment. Drugs are being sold openly on our streets, in the parks, in the squares, in pubs and outside our schools. People are coming off buses buying or selling drugs and heading off again. Addicts are taking drugs in alleyways, parks and public toilets. Kids are being hospitalised after taking fake Xanax tablets.

Derelict buildings are used as drug dens, creating hell for neighbours. Many of these houses are vandalised out of recognition and fires are being lit endangering the community around them. It is hard to overestimate the level of destruction that this brings. In a 10-year period there were a total of 6,697 deaths among drug users throughout the state.

This is equivalent to the population of the town of Kells being wiped out every 10 years. Two people die from drug-related causes in Ireland every day. 697 people die of drugrelated deaths a year. 50% of these are under the age of 40 and 75% are male.

According to statistics released to Aontú in 2019, some 48 people went before the courts for drug driving. This figure rose to 587 in 2020, 1,735 in 2021 and 2,248 last year. In the first six months of 2023 some 1,585 people went before the courts for drug driving. Reports from a Cork Coroner highlighted that alcohol and cocaine were the second and third most common causes of road deaths.

· Aontú will double roadside drug testing of drivers.

· Aontú will increase the number of Gardaí assigned to Divisional Drugs Units nationwide from 350 to 1000.

Aontú Oppose the Legalisation of Drugs

Drugs damage people’s health both physically and mentally. Any drugs policy must have its objectives correct. Fewer users means fewer lives destroyed by addiction and fewer people suffering from poor mental health as a result of drug use.

Unfortunately, deregulating access to use, results in more use. The evidence coming out of the USA and now Canada shows is that deregulation does not get rid of criminal activity. At least 50% of the drug market, even in the mature markets like Colorado and California, remain controlled by criminals. In these instances, competition between criminals and the legal market results in prices going down, potency going up, and the risk to life escalating.

It is astonishing that our current society makes it more challenging to smoke cigarettes, yet many wish to legalise cannabis, which causes at least the same damage to lungs as cigarettes. Criminal sanctions against drugs are not a purely punitive tool. Penalties, or even the threat of them, frequently spur individuals struggling with addiction or substance abuse to get the treatment they might never seek or receive on their own.

Proponents of decriminalisation often speak in favour of a health approach to addiction. Aontú also support a health approach. There is no reason why a health approach cannot run in parallel with a legal ban. In fact, more than one-third of all treatment referrals in the U.S. are currently from the legal process.

· Aontú will not legalise or decriminalise the use of drugs for recreational purposes.

· Aontú will take advice from the medical profession on the use of cannabis for medical reasons.

· Aontú will provide both a legal and health-based approach for people suffering from drug addiction.

· Aontú will review the accessibility of in-patient rehabilitation and detoxification services across the state to ensure that those who need them can access them without excessive travel.

· Aontú will ensure community addiction support groups for families and loved ones are sufficiently funded.

· Aontú will invest in community detoxification and rehab services and facilities for young people in every city in the state.

Road deaths

The annual increase in road deaths in this country is heartbreaking, the rate is increasing faster than almost any other country in the EU.

One in ten people responding to a survey have admitted to driving after having at least one drink in the last year. Stigma around drink driving in Ireland is now in decline, according to new data measuring social attitudes among drivers.

No one likes to get a speeding fine but we know that there is a direct correlation between road policing and driver behaviour. Lack of Gardaí on our roads due to plummeting numbers has impacted driving behaviour.

Enforcement saves lives. Unfortunately driver behaviour changes when they know that they are not going to be caught. Shockingly that enforcement is not happening anymore on many of our roads.

Road Policing is in chaos

Thousands of disqualified drivers who have been ordered to surrender their driving licences in the past three years have ignored the legal requirement to do so. Thousands more did not even have a licence when they were disqualified by the courts, for reasons including having already been disqualified.

Figures released to The Journal show that a total of 32,700 drivers were disqualified over 2021-2023, the vast majority by the courts rather than as a result of amassing 12 penalty points. More than a third of these did not hold a licence.

Of almost 21,000 who had a licence when they received a driving ban from 2021-2023, just 5,000 surrendered it to the National Driver Licence Service as is required by law to happen within two weeks.

There are people in court with 2 active disqualifications who are being disqualified for the third time.

Driving while disqualified is an offence carrying a maximum sentence of six months in prison and/or a €5,000 fine.

· Aontú will increase the sentence for driving while disqualified to 1 year in prison and a €15,000 fine.

· Aontú will ensure that Garda have real-time access in their vehicles that will ensure disqualified drivers will be caught.

· Aontú will ensure that full real-time access to key road traffic data between Gardaí, safety agencies and motor insurers is no longer delayed.

Human Trafficking

Human trafficking is the transporting of people for exploitation. Victims are trafficked into various types of work, including farm work, domestic work and forced prostitution. They may be subjected to sexual abuse and other forms of violence.

Human trafficking does not necessarily involve the crossing of international borders, much of the trafficking in this country is domestic - much of it relates to the sexual exploitation of children. We have a very serious and severe problem with trafficking in this country.

Human Trafficking is a stand-alone human rights issue and can/does affect Irish Nationals. It is not something that always involves boats and seas and activities in the dead of night. We only have to look around your own towns and cities, it is alive around us and is very much hidden in plain sight.

Shockingly, only three people have been convicted in the district courts for human trafficking in the past 10 years, despite more than 1,000 cases coming before them, according to data released to Aontú by the Justice Department.

We have a shameful international record on the issue of Trafficking, and we need better data collection in relation to the issue.

Victimhood of the child in these situations must always be recognised. Children are often given drugs in their school bags to be intercepted on their way to school. In other cases children are offered free drugs, become addicted, and are then forced to work for the dealers to pay for drugs.

Vulnerable children could be required to testify against a hardened criminal, or indeed against their own parents in some cases which is obviously very difficult for the child and could put the child in danger. Stigmas make these circumstances much more difficult such as 'touting' or testifying against gangs.

· Aontú will ensure the recognition of the victimhood of children within Human Trafficking and victims of child sexual exploitation.

· We will work to implement specialised supports for children that testify against an adult who has groomed and exploited them.

· Aontú will work to ensure that intent to groom, as well as grooming is a sufficient threshold to reach prosecution.

Criminal exploitation is a form of human trafficking and should be considered as a serious form of child abuse.

· Aontú will ensure the financial penalty associated is measured by the incomes generated by the children involved for the criminals associated with their exploitation.

· Aontú will implement EU recommendations that children who have been trafficked are not penalised for criminal activities they have been compelled to commit as a direct consequence of being coerced or trafficked.

· Aontú will guarantee funding for the continuation of training of front-line professionals, including An Garda Síochána, in how to identify the warning signs of trafficking.

· Aontú will seek to implement a child specific National Referral Mechanism, echoed by The Children's Rights Alliance and also therefore responding to the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission's call for more focus on Child Trafficking.

Lack of Prison Spaces

The current state of Irish prisons is extremely alarming. Aontú recently discovered there are approximately 60 more prisoners than prison beds in this country. So overcrowded are our prisons that the previous Minister for Justice selected prisoners for temporary release.

70% of current prisoners were in prison before for previous offences. There now exists a revolving door situation and preventing criminals being sent to prison. Our prison system is not working.

Our declining Garda numbers, lenient sentencing and a growing number of people with multiple convictions and no custody is making the tackling of crime very difficult.

· Aontú will add 400 prison spaces, just under 10% of total capacity to the prison system in the next 5 years. This will cost €33.6m in current spending.

16% of prisoners in Ireland have anxiety disorder, 15% have mood disorder, 8% schizophrenia/primary psychotic disorder and 4% personality disorder. 115 people have died while in custody in the state. Suicide has been cited as the cause of death in 13%; 9.5% have died by misadventure while an inquest is still pending in 50% of cases

· Aontú will work to ensure this government provides support to prisoners with addiction to drugs and those with poor mental health services in the form of wrap around counselling supports, addiction treatment, rehabilitation plans and also properly funded chaplaincy services.

Stronger Prison Sentences

· Aontú will provide on summary a six-month custodial imprisonment sentence or on conviction or indictment, two years imprisonment for attacking and injuring a Garda.

· Aontú will introduce a minimum sentence for child abuse, child pornography and sexual exploitation of children. There are far too many people walking free and of those who are sentenced get off lightly given the impact of their crime on a child.

· Aontú will secure funding for education workshops with parents and children on internet safety and parental controls

· Aontú will change the law so that any young adult over the age of 14 who has gained more than 5 JLOs will be treated as an adult for subsequent sentencing.

Pet theft and Animal welfare Bills

Aontú introduced the Criminal Justice Theft and Fraud Offences Amendment Pets Bill 2020 in the last Dáil. The legislation seeks to create a 10-month, minimum sentence for the theft of a family pet.

We also introduced the Dog Breeding Establishments (Amendment) Bill 2021 or Aontú Puppy Farm Bill which seeks to introduce a minimum standard for animals. Under the Aontú law Dogs must be kept in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary suffering. Dogs must receive treatment when necessary from a veterinary practitioner. Dogs must be permitted to exhibit their natural and normal behaviour and to have the company of other dogs where safe.

The Aontú Bill increases the penalty for breaking the law in terms of Puppy Farms and amends the definition of “authorised person” in the Act to ensure those who are specifically appointed to fulfil this role have the ability and the resources to do so.

