Working Together For Local Communities

Labour Party, 2014

Foreword

Labour in local government has a proud track record of focusing on the issues that puts the local community first and makes it a better place to live for all.

Labour in government is putting the country first by bringing Ireland from a state of economic chaos to stability. This stability has allowed us to focus on creating jobs and dealing with personal debt and the mortgage crisis. In February 2011, there was only enough money to fund the State for five months. By working together we are now seeing the signs of real recovery in Ireland. Unemployment is at its lowest in five years. We have created over 70,000 jobs since the peak of the economic crisis. We have exited the bailout and said goodbye to the Troika.

Across Ireland, Labour councillors are working every day, to build a better life for the people and communities that they represent. They are hardworking people who care passionately about their communities. They believe in protecting the environment, providing young people with opportunities to play and learn, and providing better facilities for families.

Over the next five years, in council chambers around Ireland, the councillors we elect on 23 May, will make decisions which will affect every local community. They will decide what will be built, and where it will be built.

And when we think back on our economic crash, and we think about the property bubble that led to it, that bubble had its origins in the bad planning decisions made in council chambers in the 1980s and 1990s. The frenzy of land rezoning. The permissions to building housing estates on flood plains. The planning corruption scandal that led to an expensive 14 year Tribunal of Inquiry. They can all be traced back to decisions made in the council chamber.

For more than a century, Labour has had an honourable and honest record in local government. Labour has an unrivalled record for good, sensible, sustainable planning, and the Labour Party can be proud that no Labour councillor has ever been found to have taken a corrupt payment.

There has never been a “for sale” sign on this Party, and there never will be.

Labour in local government is playing its part in getting our economy back on track. Our manifesto sets out our clear vision for supporting local jobs and economic regeneration. It also continues Labour’s track-record on the innovative delivery of vital services for local residents.

We believe that the recovery must be felt in our local communities – in our towns, cities and rural areas. No party has a better record in local government than Labour. We are working together to get more local jobs; better transport; better housing; and safer, greener communities.

What do Labour-led Councils look like?

Labour-led Local Authorities have a proven record of achievement, including: stable finances, safer streets and strong schools.

Labour has proved it can run balanced budgets in Local Authorities. Where the Labour Party has controlled Local Authority Councils, we have shown good management and have been prudent with finances.

In Dublin for example, the Labour-led Council has supported SMEs by ensuring lower rates for five years in a row; ensured the increase of the Dublin bikes scheme; and led an unprecedented investment in parks and playgrounds. We have never been involved in any corrupt developer-led planning scandals. We have always put people and local communities first in the planning process.

Labour’s Record

Working Together 40 things Labour has done

1. Labour is working together to stimulate local economies and help business start-ups to boost more economic activity locally. 70,000 jobs have been created since the peak of the crisis, stimulating local economies and reducing unemployment.

2. Labour restored the minimum wage, putting €40 a week back into the pockets of low income workers since 2011, following the unfair cut by FF/GP.

03 Labour has ensured that a minimum of 80% of the revenue collected from the property tax will be retained and spent on local services in the area that they are collected.

4. Labour ensured the construction of 2,700 new classrooms in our schools since entering government, providing high quality classrooms for over 66,000 children at a cost of €800m. We will continue the school building programme for 2014, creating 4,300 construction jobs.

5. Labour is spending €71m on a Summer Works Scheme, allowing schools to access funding for small capital works, and creating local construction jobs.

6. Labour has secured €57m investment in Prefab Replacement Scheme to date, so far benefitting 216 schools, and reducing the amount we spend renting prefabs by more than 35%.

7. Labour is delivering high speed broadband free of charge to all second level schools by September 2014.

8. Labour is helping families by giving all parents free GP care for their children under 6 as the first phase of our plan for universal primary care.

9. Labour is helping with the cost of children’s education by delivering a school-book rental scheme for every primary school in Ireland, reducing the average yearly costs for families from €80 to €20.

10. Labour has given parents a direct say on the costs of their children’s uniforms, and is legislating to create a parents and students charter which will ensure that the voices of parents and students are at the heart of all school policies.

11. Labour is creating a fair and transparent process for school admissions, while also ensuring that class sizes are maintained for the third year running.

12 Labour has delivered on a Start Your Own Business (SYOB) scheme to encourage individuals who are long-term unemployed to start their own unincorporated business. A two year exemption from income tax up to a maximum of €40,000 per annum is being provided for individuals who have been unemployed for at least 15 months prior to starting their own business.

13. Labour helped deliver the retention of the reduced rate of 9% VAT for tourism related services and goods, boosting the tourism sector and supporting growth in small businesses in the tourism sector.

14. Labour has secured a total of €12.5 billion in national and EU funding to assist rural development and aid economic recovery in rural areas to 2020.

15. Labour has re-started the Local Authority Housing Construction programme which will see a new social housing programme for the first time in many years as an important part of meeting housing need.

16. Labour has established a target of ending long-term homelessness as a major priority with clear and implementable actions to achieve that aim.

17. Labour has reduced the number of unfinished housing estates by more than 56% since 2010.

18. Labour has established a new national programme to tackle boarded-up houses that will bring more family homes back into use and reduce the chance of these units becoming a focal point for anti-social behaviour.

19. Labour has introduced landmark legislation to modernise the landlord tenant system and ensure that tenants’ rights are protected through a new a deposit protection scheme, which will see an independent operator holding and returning tenant deposits.

20. Labour continues to support families who are suffering from anti-social behaviour by strengthening the rights of residents and community groups to have a greater say in bringing cases of anti-social behaviour to the Private Residential Tenancies Board and allowing Local Authorities to repossess a home in the case of very serious anti-social activity.

21. Labour has maintained investment in key regeneration programmes in Dublin, Limerick, Dundalk, Tralee, Cork, Sligo and Longford.

22. Labour has introduced the Living Cities programme to help to regenerate the historic central areas of Ireland’s cities and will support its extension across to other urban areas across the country.

23. Labour has maintained key local road infrastructure including an extra €160 million additional stimulus allocation to local authorities for surface restoration and road reconstruction works on an extra 1800km of roads across the country. Already, €332 million has been earmarked for maintenance and upgrade of local and regional roads for 2014.

24. Labour has prioritised sustainable transport measures with a €65m investment in low carbon transport and commuter options including cycling infrastructure across the country. Labour has developed the Active Travel Towns Programme and has continued to invest in the National Cycle Network.

25. Labour has delivered the highly successful Dublin Bike Scheme and the City Bike Rental Schemes in Cork, Galway and Limerick and will continue to support its expansion.

26. Labour has maintained and enhanced the Rural Transport Programme which facilitated around 1.3 million journeys with the establishment of 18 Transport Coordination Units. These units, will develop annual transport plans with the local authority and ensure that every rural area's public transport needs are considered.

27. Labour delivered an integrated ticketing card for the Greater Dublin Area and Cork – the Leap Card – after years of delays and costs overruns by previous governments. It is to be extended out to Galway, Limerick and other urban areas.

28. Labour has facilitated the extension of on-board WiFi across the public transport bus and rail fleet.

29. Labour has protected investment in local and regional sports facilities through the Sports Capital Programme.

30. Labour has rolled-out its landmark ‘Right to Read’ Campaign in local communities across the country to tackle literacy and numerical difficulties.

31. Labour has delivered enhanced public library services including longer opening hours, and better services.

32. Labour has championed the establishment of Youth Cafés for young people across the country - in 2013, for example, 30 new Youth Cafés received funding approval under a €1.55million programme.

33. Labour is committed to supporting over 44,000 low paid working families by spending over €280m in top-up payments through the Family Income Supplement.

34. Labour has ensured better planning protection for school playing fields and open spaces and has prioritized increased playgrounds and facilities for children and young people.

35. Labour has introduced innovative free public access Wi-Fi schemes including the free Wi-Fi scheme launched by Dublin City Council in January 2013.

36. Labour has piloted the use of a Senior Citizens’ Forum to consult with older citizens on a range of issues that affect them.

37. Labour has introduced a new Home Renovation Incentive which provides a tax relief for home renovation and maintenance work.

38. Labour has championed Better/Warmer Homes Scheme which has resulted in over 250,000 home upgrades to ensure warmer homes and better quality of lives.

39. Labour ended the ‘laissez faire’ approach to taxi regulation and brought in the most comprehensive legislation on the taxi sector in the history of the State. Labour has also established the rural hackney licence to facilitate entry into the taxi market where there is a transport deficit in rural areas.

40. Labour brought in the Personal Insolvency Act and set up the Insolvency Service of Ireland (www.isi.gov.ie) to assist those in mortgage and debt distress to give people with debt problems some breathing space.

Working Together Promoting Local Jobs & Businesses

We will work with local Education and Training Boards (ETBs) in the provision of high quality further education and training programmes designed to help people in each Local Authority area to get back into employment.

Labour will ensure the publication of lists of companies who have successfully bid for significant Local Authority funded contracts to enhance the transparency of the procurement process and to allow sub-contractors to see potential opportunities for bidding for business.

Labour will ensure that Council budgets prioritise labour-intensive investment to help create local jobs.

We will roll out the use of a social clause requiring building contractors to recruit a certain percentage of those employed on a public works construction site from the long-term unemployed.

Labour will continue to deliver 63 new, local Intreo Offices offering a single point of contact service from the Department of Social Protection with a practical, tailored approach to employment services and supports for jobseekers and employers alike.

We will convene Local Employment Pacts in each Local Authority area, comprising of Local Employers, Intreo Office Managers, Education Providers (ETBs), Trade Unions and Community Stakeholders who will be tasked with coordinating local implementation plans to reduce local levels of unemployment. These Local Employment Pacts will also be responsible for coordinating local Youth Guarantee Implementation Plans.

Labour is committed to supporting local communities with the new Gateway Scheme, which will continue to be rolled out in 2014. Working in conjunction with Local Authorities, Gateway will provide 3,000 positions to long-term unemployed individuals who will work on regeneration and restoration projects to the benefit of local communities.

The Labour Party is committed to introducing a Youth Guarantee which will meet the needs of young unemployed people under the age of 25. The Guarantee will offer a good-quality place in employment, education or training within four months of becoming unemployed. This will be rolled out from 2014 onwards on a phased basis targeted first and foremost at those most in need of assistance.

Labour will encourage each Local Authority to develop its own tourism strategy highlighting the range of tourist and heritage attractions in their area and also ensure close co-operation with national and local tourism agencies to ensure that Local Authorities promote the most attractive tourism product as possible.

Labour will support the work of Sports Officers in Local Authorities to develop sport and leisure activities (for example local triathlons and Iron Man competitions) locally to ensure healthier lifestyles and also present significant tourism and jobs potential.

We will encourage Local Authorities to work with the social enterprise sector in local urban and rural communities in terms of economic development and job creation as this is a sector which has the capacity to double employment with the creation of an additional 25,000 jobs by 2020.

We will ensure effective Local Authority oversight of any ports which are transferred to Local Authority responsibility given the key role that ports play as centres of local economic activity and in the generation of local employment.

Labour will ensure that Local Authorities as employers promote best practices in terms of equality policies and we will seek to ensure a policy of no 'zero hour' contracts at Local Authority level.

We will work with the new and re-formed Local Enterprise Offices within the Local Authorities to support small and micro businesses and advise on grant support from Microfinance Ireland of funds of up to €25,000 for anyone who wishes to start or expand a business.

We will continue to support women in business by working with the Enterprise Ireland Female Entrepreneurship Unit in their strategy supporting ambitious women to grow successful businesses.

Working Together Reviving Our Towns & Cities

Labour will ensure that the new Municipal Districts build on the good work of Town Councils over many years in meeting the needs of the local areas they represent.

We will pilot an empty property scheme to encourage high street property owners to rent out their long-term vacant properties at a set discounted rate for a period of time and encourage the roll-out of ‘Pop-Up’ Shops.

We will review the Derelict Sites Act 1990 in order to strengthen the position of local authorities to compulsorily acquire a property that has been allowed to go derelict and fall into significant disrepair.

We will work with Government to introduce legislation for a levy on vacant sites to get empty sites back into productive use and to boost employment.

We will continue to support the revival of towns and cities through the use of town partnership models involving local businesses, residents, the Local Authority, An Garda Siochana etc. to work together to enhance and maintain town centres and support small local businesses.

We will encourage each council to develop a streetscape plan to ensure that their main commercial and retail streets have a co-ordinated design and planning element and there are clear minimum standards on lighting, bins etc.

We will enhance the safety and attractiveness of the night-time economy in our towns, villages and cities by rolling out the international ‘Purple Flag’ initiative – an accreditation scheme that honours excellence in the management of a town or city area between the hours of 5pm and 5am, working with An Garda Siochana, local businesses and their security staff as well as other night-times workers such as taxi drivers.

We will encourage all Local Authorities to conduct an audit of their car parking and bike spaces to ensure that there is adequate provision for those who may wish to visit the urban centre.

We will pilot the use of a programme –“Caring Retailer” model - where children who become separated from their parents in a town can wait for their parents in a secure environment.

Labour will work with retailers to develop and promote family friendly premises in our towns and cities.

Labour will reflect the role of women in our history by promoting a gender balance in the naming of any new monuments, road and bridges.

We seek to ensure that all future planning recognises the importance of getting a balanced retail mix between international, national and local retailers.

We will work closely with central government to roll-out and extend the Living Cities scheme which will help regenerate our historic towns across the country.

We will investigate the restoration of the‘living over the shop scheme’ to actively encourage people to live in the heart of our towns and cities.

Working Together Rural Development

We will continue to maintain key local road infrastructure, including the upgrading of local and regional roads in 2014.

We will continue to support local development companies in their vital work in supporting rural communities and employment.

We will support the rollout of the ambitious Rural Development Programme between now and 2020.

We will work closely with the Department of Communications on the National Broadband Mapping Plan which will identify rural and less populated areas that need government support in rolling out high speed broadband.

We will fully support the implementation of measures to facilitate the innovative Rural Taxi services.

We will work with the new transport co-ordination units (TUCs) that are being established to enhance the support and delivery of the Rural Transport Programme.

We will promote local agricultural co-operatives and farmers who are involved in small scale commercial production for local and national markets.

We will work with community stakeholders and organisations to encourage the provision of clinics or workshops for young farmers on how to access funding for innovative farm practices at EU level.

We will encourage use of some of the EU funding secured by disadvantaged communities for the development of community projects - such as community centres which would act as a hub for all age groups - in unused publicly owned buildings.

We will work with the local Education Training Boards to encourage the provision of short courses at flexible times for those engaged in farming so as to assist them in the development of other sources of income for themselves and their families that would complement their work.

We will facilitate local communities in setting up a ‘workshop’-type approach for minding men’s mental health, particularly unemployed or retired men or isolated rural dwellers and we will continue to support the very valuable “Men’s Shed” movement.

We will encourage young entrepreneurs to establish businesses with tourism potential in rural areas such as along the Wild Atlantic Way or the Green Way in Mayo.

We will ask school authorities and school teachers to help us develop plans to support sustainable school communities across the entire country.

We will work with the Department of Communications to continue the implementation of the National Broadband Plan, to ensure that all parts of Ireland have access to high speed broadband, with a view to ensuring that all citizens and businesses can participate fully in, and maximise the benefits of, a digitally enabled economy and society.

Working Together Supporting Families in Our Communities

Labour Councillors will work with our local communities to implement the maximum possible reduction in the local property tax for residents from 2015, where funding conditions permit the maintenance of essential local services and a decent society.

Labour is helping families by giving all parents free GP care for their children under 6, as the first phase of our plan for universal primary care.

Labour will continue to assist with the cost of children’s education by committing to the continuation of a school-book rental scheme for every primary school in Ireland, reducing the average yearly costs for families from €80 to €20.

Labour is giving parents a direct say on the costs of their children’s uniforms, and is legislating to create a parents and students charter which will ensure that the voices of parents and students are at the heart of all school policies.

We will prioritize internet safety awareness for children and young people especially for those many children who use library services around the country.

We will continue to support the rollout of the hugely successful Better Energy Homes Schemes to make homes more energy efficient, cut home heating bills and support local construction jobs.

Labour continues to prioritize better planning protection for school playing fields and open spaces, including playgrounds and facilities for children and young people through the development plan process.

Labour will better plan and promote the development of our public parks and green spaces to integrate more healthy walkways, greenways, pocket parks and green gyms.

We will seek to develop underused land as additional playground and recreational facilities.

We will continue to support the roll-out of vital local training and job activation programmes including the Community Employment and Gateway schemes.

We will work with local Education and Training Boards (ETBs) in the provision of high quality further education and training programmes designed to help people in each Local Authority area to get back into employment.

Labour will continue to champion the establishment of Youth Cafes for young people across the country - in 2013, for example, 30 new Youth Cafes received funding approval under a €1.55 million programme.

We will work to tailor the Joint Policing Committees to reflect local needs and requirements across the country by working with the Department of Justice to ensure a more responsive and relevant response to tackle anti-social behaviour and build safer communities.

Working Together Making Services Work Better for Local Communities

Labour will introduce a Charter of Service for users of City and County Council services – including detailed customer service standards for Local Authorities and a Respect Agreement for Local Authority Staff.

Labour will ensure that services are benchmarked for Local Authorities across the country – there must be a minimum service provision level between the Local Authorities and local communities.

Labour will continue to support the roll-out of more Age Friendly Local Authorities. We will ensure age friendly criteria are applied for young and old. New estates for example, must cater for both its older and younger residents.

We will continue the countrywide establishment of Senior Citizen Fora in Local Authority areas to consult older citizens on a range of issues including public transport, active retirement services and personal security.

We will ensure that the Barcelona Declaration is implemented across all Local Authorities. This is an important convention on accessibility for citizens with disabilities that will also ensure on-going consultation with citizens with a disability and their representatives in terms of the provision of Local Authority services.

We will advocate that each local authority has a disability officer and that all staff receive disability awareness training.

We will continue to implement new local government legislation with maximum devolution of power to ensure that each Local Authority offers the most responsive service to citizens.

We will ensure that all local authority policy-making is underpinned by the need for social inclusion.

We will introduce a training programme for new City and County Councillors outlining their duties and responsibilities, including training to combat racism and homophobia and promote equality.

We will promote a consumer protection role for Councils to ensure the public service remit of private sector service providers. Councils should also be able to question, in a public forum, public service providers, like school managers.

We will work with the Courts Service in order to examine the wider use of courthouses around the country, for semi-state agencies, as well as non-profit and cultural organisations, where appropriate.

We will ensure the sustainability of the post office network and as part of that approach we fully support the concept of the post office as a “front office” of Government.

Working Together Enhancing Democracy & Trust

Each Councillor will sign up to an‘oath of office’ on their first day as an elected representative to be an ethical councillor. This follows on from our long record on ethics and accountability in local government.

Labour will continue to build towards full and meaningful public consultation with citizens on Council plans and developments. We will give citizens greater information on how the consultation process works. We will ensure that current consultations are clearly signalled on the front page of the Council’s website.

Labour will promote the greater involvement of local community groups and residents’ associations and facilitate the formal recognition of residents’ associations.

We will support the use of a range of innovative civic participation methods in the local government process including the use of petition rights, town/area meetings and plebiscites where appropriate.

In the context of the EU Charter of Local Self-Government, we will continue to support the drafting of legislation on any proposed referendum on the issue of a directly elected mayor for Dublin.

We will promote a readily accessible hotline for complaints in the form of a free phone number and email address so that residents’ complaints can be quickly and effectively dealt with, developing on the www.fixmystreet.ie model.

We will ensure that residents who complain to the Council are fully informed of their rights and responsibilities in seeking redress from the Ombudsman.

We will ensure that Councillors attendance at conferences and training courses is relevant and cost-effective.

We will prioritize environmentally sensitive procurement policies and encourage the development of criteria to ensure that goods procured for Local Authority use are ethically sourced where possible.

We will work with local credit unions and MABs to highlight their work in local communities helping people with problem debt and in taking a stand against unscrupulous money lenders.

Working Together Moving to a 21st Century Public Service Infrastructure

Labour will ensure that each local authority develops a digital strategy detailing how they intend to progress the greater digital delivery of local government services and with clear guidelines on the protection of personal data and use of social media. There should be a clear list of services that each council provides online including, for example, paying parking fines; applying for housing; objecting to a planning application; reporting a pothole; disposing of electrical goods; reserving a library book and finding help in starting a business.

In the interests of democracy and transparency we will continue to promote e-democracy by making sure that all full council meetings are broadcast on the web and archived; and that as much information as possible is published and made available to citizens online.

We will advocate that a clear and user-friendly breakdown of how each Council spends its income each year is published online.

We will drive greater direct engagement with local residents and residents’ associations through digital technology and social media in terms of participation in policy development and priorities.

We will pilot social media surgeries for local residents, businesses and communities to directly engage with the different branches of local government and which will also encourage local communities to get online.

We will particularly target the use of social media and online engagement between the local authority and vulnerable local residents including citizens with a disability or reduced mobility and senior citizens who have traditionally found it more difficult to engage with their local council.

We will encourage neighbouring Local Authorities to co-operate in terms of their procurement processes in order to reduce costs and to ensure similar standards across local authorities.

We will promote the collation and analysis of data across Local Authorities that will help them better plan for future delivery of services and respond to the changing needs of local residents.

We will support an increased availability of “Silver Surfers” programmes which allow older citizens to get internet training and help to get them online especially through our local library network.

Working Together Investing in Housing & Planning

Labour has always recognised social housing building as a vital element in meeting housing need and we will seek a significant extension of the local authority build programme, as a matter of urgency.

Labour has restarted a social housing building programme with an immediate investment of €100m, the first building programme in years and we will significantly build on this to ensure we roll out an extensive house building programme across the country.

Labour Councillors will work with government, the Housing Agency and NAMA, and approved housing bodies to continue identifying suitable NAMA housing units and bring them into social housing use.

Labour Councillors are committed to the eradication of long-term homelessness as a major priority.

Labour is committed to introducing legislation for a levy on vacant sites to get empty sites back into productive use and to boost employment.

Labour will facilitate the use of empty and derelict buildings and sites and we will use the Derelict Sites Act much more vigorously to tackle unsightly and unused properties.

Labour has delivered an additional €15m to tackle boarded-up houses to allow more families to be housed and to prevent these vacant properties attracting anti-social behaviour. Labour Councillors will seek a monthly report from the Local Authority on void status to ensure no local authority house is allowed to stand idle. Labour will also recommend a streamlined approach within Councils to ensure one person is responsible for the speedy resolution of voids.

Labour will require Local Authorities and/or Housing Agencies to promote community involvement in local housing projects and enhance development of housing co-op opportunities.

We will encourage the extension of the “empty nester” downsizing scheme which allows older people who want to move to a smaller home to sell their home to the council and be re-housed in suitable accommodation.

We will work with the statutory agencies to ensure compliance by landlords with registration and standards registration.

We will actively promote better accessibility of people with disabilities to public buildings.

We will work across Local Authorities to identify an inventory in terms of land available for housing.

We will seek the urgent return to flexibility at a local level in terms of rent caps to tackle displacement and allow discretion to be applied by Community Welfare Officers.

We will continue to maintain funding for the important local authority supports for the adaptation of housing for older people or people with a disability in order to facilitate independent living.

We will ensure that environmental and accessibility standards are integral to the design and approval for new estates.

We will establish pilot projects to involve the local community and their representatives to participate in the development of designs for future landmark buildings, street furniture and quality shop fronts.

We will continue to support the roll out of home insulation schemes such as Warmer Homes Scheme to upgrade fuel poor homes and create jobs.

We will support the use of infill development in urban areas to bring it back into residential and community use, in the interests of better planning and encouraging people back into village and town centres.

Working Together For Safer, Cleaner & Greener Communities

Labour will insist on good planning standards in terms of safe and well-lit, inclusive public spaces that prevent the development of anti-social behaviour black spots.

Labour will use the Joint Policing Committees system to increase measures aimed at tackling anti-social behaviour black spots in conjunction with all relevant stakeholders including the Local Authority, estate management forum and the Gardaí.

Labour will prioritise support for Community Gardaí and through the use of the Joint Policing Committees will monitor and guarantee Community Gardaí are utilised in the best possible manner.

Labour will prioritize the enhanced enforcement of all local authority bye-laws that relate to anti-social activity in public places.

Labour will pilot the use of Community Alcohol Partnerships (CAPs) involving alcohol retailers, An Garda Siochana, Local Authorities and local business representatives to tackle underage drinking.

Labour will ensure that traffic calming measures are part of the planning requirements for new housing estates.

Labour will promote a readily accessible hotline for complaints in the form of a free phone number and email address so that residents’ complaints can be quickly and effectively dealt with, developing on the www.fixmystreet.ie model.

Labour will encourage an increased role for Local Authorities in community mediation to resolve disputes between neighbours before they escalate.

Labour will seek to introduce “Community Wardens” with combined functions to help support local communities.

Labour will promote the development of ‘Green Gyms’ in public parks and green spaces.

Labour will expand and develop a community garden and allotments scheme.

Labour will commit to an improvement of street sweeping and publish a regular schedule for such cleaning.

Labour will investigate innovative approaches to tackling the issue of dog fouling, in particular in relation to persistent offenders and in order to eradicate this problem from our streets. We will also consult the public on possible methods to solve this problem while looking at best practice from other countries.

Labour will support a new water safety campaign in conjunction with Irish Water Safety, Waterways Ireland, local schools and community stakeholders to help address the unacceptable increase in drowning deaths across the country.

Labour will continue to support the work of the Voluntary Rescue Services across the country.

Labour will encourage the development of non-profit walking and jogging clubs.

Labour will support the use of Local Authority civic spaces and public buildings including libraries for the rollout of public health campaigns such as minding your mental health.

Labour will pilot the greater use of libraries for health and well being initiatives such as “Reading Well Books on Prescription” programme which helps people manage their own health and well-being through recommended self-help books.

We will ensure that Local Authorities support victims of racism and challenge racially motivated anti-social behaviour by offering practical support. We will ensure an introduction of a specific policy on anti-racism that is distinct from the authority’s policy on anti-social behaviour.

Working Together Transport, Traffic and Parking

Labour will continue to maintain key local road infrastructure. Already, €332 million has been earmarked for maintenance and upgrade of local and regional roads for 2014.

Labour will champion an approach to transport that prioritizes mobility-for-all including the piloting of a level of service guarantee for transport services for commuters.

Labour will seek to make the National Transport Authority more accountable to Local Authorities.

Labour will encourage each local authority to undertake an ‘active travel’ promotional campaign, such as cycling or walking holidays in Ireland and your local area.

Labour will ensure that neighbourhood redesigns make local communities healthy, walk-able and cycle-able.

Labour will use the new powers brought in by the Labour Party in government by enhancing the regulation of clamping and ensure private clamping companies are subject to the same regulations as public clampers.

Labour will investigate alternative ways of dealing with traffic and parking problems in consultation with residents, schools and local businesses.

Labour will continue to support the rollout of the highly successful public bike schemes in urban areas.

Labour will promote safer routes for both cyclists and pedestrians and will promote cycling through a new cycling network.

Labour will ensure that each Local Authority has a staff member that is responsible for developing and supporting cycling policy.

Labour will promote safe cycling and deter dangerous cycling by supporting the introduction of on-the-spot fines for cyclists as part of the current road safety strategy.

We will prioritize “Safe Cycle to School” routes and increase the number of secure cycle stands at schools.

We will encourage the use of “walking buses” for children to allow them to walk safely to school each day.

Labour will give Local Authorities a greater role in the design and implementation of public transport services.

We will make bus shelters a centre for public information - prototype outdoor noticeboard given they are easily accessible for public information, while being mindful of heritage towns.

We will continue to rollout park and ride facilities for commuters.

We will progress the creation of linear parks along walking routes/rivers etc. and promote a network of walking routes.

Connecting the Luas – Connecting Dublin

Labour has secured delivery of the important Luas Cross City project which will connect the two Dublin Luas lines and link with the Maynooth/Dunboyne commuter line at Broombridge in Cabra.

2013 was the most successful year ever for Luas with passenger numbers of around 30.3 million. This will grow even further with the Luas cross city project and the extension of services on the Northside. This is part of a wider commitment to connecting people in the wider hinterland to key urban areas.

Labour will work to deliver Metro North, as soon as finances permit.

Working Together Respecting our Shared Environment

We will address the problem of noise pollution including noisy neighbours and anti-social noise in local communities, by making the procedures for dealing with noise issues more accessible and ensuring that complaints are dealt with in a timely manner.

We will prioritise waste prevention, minimisation and recycling within all County waste management plans.

Labour will continue to support Tidy Towns Committees, Local Hero groups and community environmental maintenance groups through the community awards scheme.

Labour will review the existing legislation which deals with our litter laws.

Illegal dumping, litter, dog fouling and graffiti must be tackled appropriately – we will seek to increase the number of Dog and Litter Wardens and prioritize combatting the growing problem of illegal dumping in our cities, towns and villages.

We will broaden the policy of publication of names of persons convicted of offences prosecuted by the Council, particularly environmental offences.

Where suitable land is available we will encourage and support the temporary allotment of such land for cultivation.

We will consider the introduction of a hedgerow scheme – Clare County Council, for example, has introduced a €20,000 scheme where the council is supporting the ongoing maintenance of roadside boundaries by landowners through the provision of grants of €25 per kilometre of hedgerow. This would also act as a stimulus for local contractors.

We will enhance the provision of Bring Centres to encourage recycling and encourage the provision of bottle banks in more communities.

We will encourage the development of green walkways along old railway tracks, rivers, canals and coastal areas.

Labour will ensure that established public rights of way are protected and preserved through development plans and the planning process.

Labour will support Blue Flag status for our beaches.

Labour will encourage measures to shorten the food supply chain such as encouraging farmers’ markets.

We will continue to invest in measures to assess flood risks and protect our communities from flooding.

We will encourage every Local Authority to have a Biodiversity Officer and publish its own local biodiversity plan.

We are committed to the development of a coastal protection strategy and proper coastal zone management.

We are committed to establishing realistic budgets to address flood defences in light of the recent IPCC report.

We will ensure formal coordination of coastal zone management and protection policies between coastal authorities, including those north of the border.

Working Together Learning Communities

We will continue to support the roll-out of vital local training and job activation programmes including the Community Employment and Gateway schemes.

We will work with local Education and Training Boards (ETBs) in the provision of further education programmes designed to up-skill workers in the Local Authority area.

We will continue to support Labour’s Right to Read campaign which addresses literacy and numeracy difficulties in particular through the use of homework clubs, promotion of innovative library programmes such as the “Baby Books Bundle” for young parents and the DCC “Beano Comic Initiative”; increase library outreach services; and enhance “Family Learning through Football” schemes which encourages family learning in an informal setting.

We will promote Local Education Forums involving local representatives, school and parental representatives to discuss and progress the needs of local schools in the area.

We will provide funding to all libraries to allow them to provide free books to all junior infant children during their first week of school, while ensuring that each child becomes a member of their local library.

We will ensure that Local Authority staff have the necessary opportunities for up-skilling and training to allow them to carry out their public service delivery roles though liaising with our local ETBs and Institutes of Technology.

We will encourage the establishment of apprenticeship schemes across a wider range of crafts, including through our Local Authorities.

We will support and fund resources such as www.helpmykidlearn.ie which empower parents to help their children improve their literacy and numeracy skills.

We will continue to ensure that parents get to decide what model of school patronage will be available in new schools in their areas.

We will promote the development of short courses by schools in co-operation with local industry and community groups – making sure that children can learn in non-exploitative ways relevant to their communities.

We will transfer all former FÁS training centres to the control of the local Education and Training Boards/SOLAS, to ensure that local decisions can be made about what education and training opportunities are most relevant.

Working Together Driving Digital Ireland

We will continue to support the roll out of high quality free public Wi-Fi access, where appropriate.

We will prioritize internet safety awareness for children and young people especially for those many children who use library services around the country.

We will deliver high speed broadband free of charge to all second level schools by September 2014.

We will support an increased availability of “Silver Surfers” programmes which allow older citizens to get internet training and help to get them online especially through our local library network.

Working Together Energy & Climate Change

We will continue to support the rollout of the hugely successful Better Energy Homes Schemes to make homes more energy efficient, cut home heating bills and support local construction jobs.

We will ensure that every Local Authority has its own carbon emissions reduction strategy including a comprehensive transport plan that encourages walking, cycling, car-pooling and public transport.

We will encourage each Local Authority to have a detailed energy efficiency plan for how they carry out their business to cut energy costs and reduce their carbon emissions.

We will carry out an energy audit of all Local Authority owned properties to ensure that local authorities take the lead in reducing energy consumption and making their own buildings as energy efficient as possible. Where possible Local Authorities should also pilot innovative renewable energy schemes including solar panels on their own buildings.

We will support the roll-out of urban and rural energy co-operatives where local residents and businesses come together to generate some of their own energy needs.

We will promote measures to allow local communities to undertake voluntary group insulation schemes which can reduce the cost of insulating homes.

We will facilitate the introduction of micro-generation of heat and electricity into Area Development Plans where appropriate to allow new developments to generate some of their own energy needs, where practicable.

Working Together Arts, Heritage & the Creative Industries

We will review our Local Government Arts Policy to fully support the Arts in local communities given the importance of the Arts for engaging the creative mind and its role as an economic driver.

We will facilitate the use of vacant retail premises by exhibiting artists – based on successful schemes such as “Space Invaders” in Galway which uses empty retail units to support local artists.

We will extend the use of exhibition space in community and local civic buildings.

We will involve schools and colleges in the Council’s arts and culture programme.

We will continue to support the Per Cent for Art Scheme.

We will ensure that Local Authorities recognise and fully participate in the Decade of Commemorations.

We will encourage every Local Authority to develop its historical heritage for tourism, for example through the establishment of “historical quarters.”

We will increase the use of plaques on local buildings to highlight buildings of historical importance and the lives of famous inhabitants who have made a significant local or national contribution to public life.

We will continue to support the publication of local and county histories.

We will protect the character and heritage of our historic village centres by the development of Village Design Statements that would ensure all future planning and development takes full cognisance of the historic character of the village centre.

We will champion the designation and protection of key Irish heritage sites as UNESCO World Heritage sites including the Burren; the Céide Fields and North West Mayo Boglands; the Monastic City of Clonmacnoise and its Cultural Landscape; the Historic City of Dublin; early medieval monastic sites – Durrow, Clonmacnoise, Glendalough, Inis Cealtra, Kells and Monasterboice; the Western Stone Forts – 7 of which are on the Aran Islands, Cahercommaun, The Burren, Caherconree, Staigue, Benagh and the Dingle Peninsula; and the Royal Sites of Ireland – Cashel, Dún Ailinne, the Hill of Uisneach, the Rathcroghan Complex, the Tara Complex and, the Navan Fort in Co. Armagh.

Labour will ensure the development and protection of county archive services to preserve local cultural patrimony.

Labour will support local schools, youth groups and libraries in enhancing their music resources and to provide access to musical training and instruments for the benefit of local communities.

