Introduction

The Cork City Social Democrats believe that Cork can become a city that leads Ireland and the world in terms of quality of life. We believe that there is the potential to build an economic and cultural powerhouse in what will be soon the second largest English-speaking city in the EU.

To achieve this vision, bold decisions need to be taken across the city. We need plans to tackle the transport, environmental and housing problems that the city faces. We need focused action to make our city more liveable than it is today.

The City Council and our elected representatives should be the fulcrum for these bold decisions. They should be the ones driving the strategy for how we make Cork an even better place to live than it is today.

Our council should be working towards ensuring that every Corkonian has a roof over their heads by having a Cork City action plan for Homelessness and having an ambitious plan to build more social housing across the city.

Our council should have a plan to improve transportation across the city by focusing on how we can improve roads and public transport.

We know that not all the problems that Cork faces can be fixed by City Hall and we need a strong social democratic voice, at local, national and international level, but those elected to the City Council will be the voice of Cork for the next five years and as such they speak so that both those inside and outside of Cork will hear.

In this manifesto for Cork City, we outline the priorities that Social Democrat Councillors will be pushing for if elected to the City Council. Focusing on the following areas
• Democracy and Transparency
• Housing
• Transport
• Environment
• Planning

If you want change, vote for it. It’s time.

Democracy and Transparency

The Cork City Social Democrats believe that open and transparent government at the local level is a key factor to ensure that we have public services that deliver for the people of Cork City and that public trust in our institutions remains.

To support transparent government in Cork City we will support the following initiatives

City Council meetings should be open and accessible to all. To facilitate this, all council meetings should be streamed live on the internet via the City Council website.

Support the adoption of a Directly Elected Mayor for Cork City. Under the plans announced on 2 nd April by the Minister for State for Local Government JohnPaul Phelan, there will be a local plebiscite on a Mayor for Cork, and we urge the citizens of Cork to vote Yes.

If approved we will urge the Government to legislate for the new Mayor to have significant executive powers over budgets, resource allocation, planning, housing and transportation. This may require powers to be devolved from Central Government as well. We support this plan because we strongly believe that the path of democracy is best served by having the power to elect those who govern us. Today Ireland has the second weakest local government structure in Europe and Local Councillors have very little ability to influence the strategic direction for the services in the communities that they represent.

We support the introduction of a participatory budgeting scheme in Cork City. This is similar to that implemented in South Dublin County Council. A participatory budgeting scheme will democratically empower the citizens in a local community to determine how a portion of their public budget is spent to improve their community e.g. a new playground, GAA club improvements etc.

It is vital for citizens of Cork to understand how the City Council is raising and spending its money. Therefore, there should be within one week of the Council budget being approved, a one-page financial summary is to be made available publicly on the City Council website, that shows, the key sources of income and expenditure and what this means at a per citizen level. This will allow Corkonians to understand what services are being provided by the council, how much they cost and how they are being funded.

The City Council should continue its efforts to register voters and to encourage everyone to participate in elections.

Housing

Today, the average rent in Cork City is nearly €1,200 per month and the average cost to buy a home in County Cork has risen from 151,430 in 2014 to 228,000 today. As the city sees continued growth, there is ever more pressure on a limited stock of housing.

Cork Social Democrats believe that not only is housing a human right, but a lack of affordable housing is both detrimental to the sustainable economic growth and the social wellbeing of the people of Cork.

There have been calls from across the community including from pressure groups, unions, Business leaders and the Cork Business Association (CBA) for action on both derelict sites and on new housing.

To tackle this problem, Cork City Council needs to make more efficient use of its existing housing stock and work to address the issue of derelict sites and vacant homes.

Cork City Council needs to plan for the future. As the population of the city is projected to double over the next 25 years, the Council need to decide now on the location of new housing, the provision of services and transport and ensure that large housing projects are centred on building new communities, and not just a never-ending series of new estates.

Use of Existing Housing

Today Cork City Council has an average re-let time of 61 weeks whereas the best councils (SDCC) can do this in 10 weeks according to the National Oversight and Audit Commission Report Performance Indicators report 2017 report. The Cork Social Democrats would target council officials to reduce time and cost to the National averages of 29 weeks and €17,106 as opposed to the 61 weeks and €29,558 by leveraging best practice from other councils.

Cork Social Democrats would request funding for the Vacant Homes Officer become a permanent position from the 2 years trial it is today.

Would request the Council to publish online its register of Vacant Homes and Derelict sites in the same way that Cork County Council does today.

New Housing and Derelict sites

Cork City Council has a housing capital budget of over €500m for the years 2019 to 2021. The Cork Social Democrats believe that that number needs to double to €1bn in the period 2022 to 2025 to take into account the expanded population of the city and need for new housing.

We believe Cork City Council should establish an aggressive Housing plan that would aim to deliver an additional 5,000 new social houses from across the city in the period between 2022 and 2027. This is in comparison to the 2260 target for 2017 to 2021.

We will look for planning guidance that there is sufficient provision of accessible social housing across the city to ensure that there is adequate housing for those with additional needs.

To do this the Cork City Council should seek additional loan funding from the European Investment Bank (EIB) of €50m. EIB funding is available to local authorities and Government agencies at preferential rates of interest to fund infrastructure projects. We believe that a significant loan proposed will be revenue neutral as the loan will be repaid from income generated by the sale or rent of properties purchased. Funding should be secured for capital projects from 2022 onwards. Matched funding of €50m will be required from Central Government to enable this loan.

New funding should be directed towards two objectives:
• €50m to fund the purchase and redevelopment of Derelict sites.
• €50m for seed infrastructure to new development areas.

There should be a focus within the new developments on providing homes for downsizers, those over the age of 55 who wish to move from their existing large family homes into something that is easier to maintain.

We would encourage the development of apartments above shops on our Main Streets to encourage more people to live in the heart of Cork. This would not only help young professionals and young families relying on public transportation to live in the city, but it would also provide a boost to businesses on our Main Streets.

Transportation

Ease of getting around any city is one of the keys to making a city liveable. The Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy (CMATS) will outline plans for future transportation links in Cork City and surrounding areas, and we urge for its speedy publication.

Cycling

The Bike Sharing scheme in Cork is popular. On average in 2017, there were more than 23,000 journeys undertaken by a “Coke bike” every month.

The Cork City Social Democrats will lobby for an extension of the Bike sharing scheme, especially to parts of the city such as Blackpool and Blackrock where the topography of the city makes it suitable for cyclists of all abilities.

Cork Social Democrats will work closely with the Cork Cycling Campaign who have led in the area of cycling alternatives for the city.

We also support segregating cycle lanes from vehicular traffic.

Public Transport

Bus Usage in Cork City increased by 19% between 2013 and 2017 and overall Bus Eireann usage increased 13.2% in 2018.

To support further increases in Public Transport in Cork, Social Democrats will lobby for increased bus services including increasing frequency of services on the Northside of the city and Glanmire.

We would support a city-wide public transport and traffic survey to tackle congestion and heavy traffic at rush hour. With our population increasing and more cars on our roads than ever, we must look at new solutions to make it easier to get around the city.

We support the continuation of the Pana bus lanes implemented in 2018 which are helping buses get through the city centre at peak hours in the evening.

We also support the ongoing City Centre Movement strategy that prioritises public transport corridors.

We will advocate for the continued expansion of Bus Éireann’s Regional Service accessibility fleet to ensure Cork City is accessible to all residents as well as those coming to the city for business or pleasure.

Roads

There is increasing traffic congestion in Cork City. To tackle this congestion, we believe that a citywide traffic management strategy, for the enlarged city needs to be developed. This should focus on traffic crunch points such as traffic entering Douglas, Grange and Rochestown, the main road in Ballincollig and the traffic entering the Blackpool shopping centre.

We believe that there should be a coordinated effort between the Garda and the city council parking enforcement team, to ensure that the existing rules on driving and parking in bus lanes, on yellow lines and in misuse of disability parking spaces in Cork City is enforced.

We would also lobby for analysis into a second crossing of the River Lee beyond Tivoli to reduce congestion on the Jack Lynch Tunnel, that now sees more than 68,000 cars per day, more than 3 times the number when the Tunnel opened 20 years ago. We would also lobby for a further study into a Northern relief road for Cork between Glanmire and Ballincollig.

Environment

Flood Defences.

The Cork Social Democrats believe that flood defences for Cork City are crucial for the success of the city and support schemes that will ensure that business and individuals are protected from flooding in the city centre.

While welcome the current OPW plans for flood defences are still flawed.

We believe that
• The cost estimates provided are too low, and this may lead to cost overruns and funding difficulties in the future.
• There has been a limited assessment made on the impact of the construction activity on the city, especially increased traffic congestion during construction.
• More research is needed into the effectiveness and location of pumping stations across the city centre island.
• Serious consideration should be given to a Tidal barrier scheme as proposed by the Save Cork City.

We support the Save Cork City campaign.

Parks and Public Spaces

Cork is underserved by public parks and play amenities. We believe that every child should be within 15-minute walk of an outdoor play facility and as such the investment in play facilities should not just be focused on Fitzgerald’s Park, Ballincollig regional park and other large facilities but must instead be located in parks and council-owned open space across the city.

We would like to see an additional €250,000 invested in additional play equipment across the city. This should be funded by increasing the Development Contribution.

Any future investment in parks should be designed with accessibility in mind. We will lobby for additional funds to upgrade existing park facilities in Cork City to make them more disability-friendly.

Community spaces that are open and accessible to all are vital in developing a thriving community.

The Cork Social Democrats will advocate for additional public meeting rooms to be developed in the City Centre and advocate for the purchase and development of city centre spaces for open-air public events.

Planning

Under the National Planning Framework published in February 2018, the Cork Metropolitan area is expected to grow its population from approximately 209,000 to 314,000 by 2040. To achieve this level of growth in addition to the massive expansion of infrastructure and expenditure there will need to be a local strategic framework developed to deliver this growth.

We would like to see local development plans created for each of the major settlements in Cork City.

These local plans should focus on how the additional housing and additional employment is developed in each of those communities.

An overall development plan should be created for the expanded City.

We believe that these plans should focus on bringing brownfield sites back into use, increasing the resident population within walking distance of the City and should focus on increasing density in central parts of our community.

We believe that planning guidance for new property development must ensure that new developments are linked to their communities and that the needs of pedestrians and cyclists be prioritised by the provision of well-lit paths between estates.

Accessibility

13% of Cork City’s population experience disability or impairment.

Cork City Social Democrats believe the city should be accessible to all its citizens.

To improve accessibility in the city, we would advocate for the following:
• That all future Cork City recreational projects include Changing Places facilities - accessible toilets which include a hoist, adult-sized changing bench and larger space for additional assistants, to ensure the health, safety and dignity of those with disabilities and mobility issues in Cork.
• That Cork City council implement the recommendations made by Inclusion Ireland in their 2016 Consultation on the Statement of Strategy for Transport, Tourism and Sport to install Changing Places facilities at large tourist destinations such as Blarney Castle as well as stadia, airports, train and bus stations.
• To place universal design at the forefront of all future Cork City developments.

